       DEDICATION

 To Mom, Dad, and Morgan, who
wanted to know what happened next,
        even when I didn’t.
      CONTENTS

Dedication

One
Two
Three
Four
Five
Six
Seven
Eight
Nine
Ten
Eleven
Twelve
Thirteen
Fourteen
Fifteen
Sixteen
Seventeen
Eighteen
Nineteen
Twenty
Twenty-One
Twenty-Two
Twenty-Three
Twenty-Four
Twenty-Five
Twenty-Six
Twenty-Seven
Twenty-Eight
Epilogue
Acknowledgments
Back Ad
About the Author
Credits
Copyright
About the Publisher
                 ONE

I hate First Friday. It makes the village
crowded, and now, in the heat of high
summer, that’s the last thing anyone
wants. From my place in the shade it
isn’t so bad, but the stink of bodies, all
sweating with the morning work, is
enough to make milk curdle. The air
shimmers with heat and humidity, and
even the puddles from yesterday’s storm
are hot, swirling with rainbow streaks of
oil and grease.
    The market deflates, with everyone
closing up their stalls for the day. The
merchants are distracted, careless, and
it’s easy for me to take whatever I want
from their wares. By the time I’m done,
my pockets bulge with trinkets and I’ve
got an apple for the road. Not bad for a
few minutes’ work. As the throng of
people moves, I let myself be taken
away by the human current. My hands
dart in and out, always in fleeting
touches. Some paper bills from a man’s
pocket, a bracelet from a woman’s wrist
—nothing too big. Villagers are too busy
shuffling along to notice a pickpocket in
their midst.
     The high, stilt buildings for which
the village is named (the Stilts, very
original) rise all around us, ten feet
above the muddy ground. In the spring
the lower bank is underwater, but right
now it’s August, when dehydration and
sun sickness stalk the village. Almost
everyone looks forward to the first
Friday of each month, when work and
school end early. But not me. No, I’d
rather be in school, learning nothing in a
classroom full of children.
    Not that I’ll be in school much
longer. My eighteenth birthday is
coming, and with it, conscription. I’m
not apprenticed, I don’t have a job, so
I’m going to be sent to the war like all
the other idle ones. It’s no wonder
there’s no work left, what with every
man, woman, and child trying to stay out
of the army.
    My brothers went to war when they
turned eighteen, all three of them sent to
fight Lakelanders. Only Shade can write
worth a lick, and he sends me letters
when he can. I haven’t heard from my
other brothers, Bree and Tramy, in over
a year. But no news is good news.
Families can go years without hearing a
thing, only to find their sons and
daughters waiting on the front doorstep,
home on leave or sometimes blissfully
discharged. But usually you receive a
letter made of heavy paper, stamped
with the king’s crown seal below a short
thank-you for your child’s life. Maybe
you even get a few buttons from their
torn, obliterated uniforms.
     I was thirteen when Bree left. He
kissed me on the cheek and gave me a
single pair of earrings for my little
sister, Gisa, and me to split. They were
dangling glass beads, the hazy pink color
of sunset. We pierced our ears ourselves
that night. Tramy and Shade kept up the
tradition when they went. Now Gisa and
I have one ear each set with three tiny
stones to remind us of our brothers
fighting somewhere. I didn’t really
believe they’d have to go, not until the
legionnaire in his polished armor
showed up and took them away one after
another. And this fall, they’ll come for
me. I’ve already started saving—and
stealing—to buy Gisa some earrings
when I go.
    Don’t think about it . That’s what
Mom always says, about the army, about
my brothers, about everything. Great
advice, Mom.
    Down the street, at the crossing of
Mill and Marcher roads, the crowd
thickens and more villagers join the
current. A gang of kids, little thieves in
training, flutters through the fray with
sticky, searching fingers. They’re too
young to be good at it, and Security
officers are quick to intervene. Usually
the kids would be sent to the stocks, or
the jail at the outpost, but the officers
want to see First Friday. They settle for
giving the ringleaders a few harsh
knocks before letting them go. Small
mercies.
    The tiniest pressure at my waist
makes me spin, acting on instinct. I grab
at the hand foolish enough to pickpocket
me, squeezing tight so the little imp
won’t be able to run away. But instead
of a scrawny kid, I find myself staring up
at a smirking face.
     Kilorn Warren. A fisherman’s
apprentice, a war orphan, and probably
my only real friend. We used to beat
each other up as children, but now that
we’re older—and he’s a foot taller than
me—I try to avoid scuffles. He has his
uses, I suppose. Reaching high shelves,
for example.
     “You’re getting faster.” He chuckles,
shaking off my grip.
     “Or you’re getting slower.”
    He rolls his eyes and snatches the
apple out of my hand.
    “Are we waiting for Gisa?” he asks,
taking a bite of the fruit.
    “She has a pass for the day.
Working.”
    “Then let’s get moving. Don’t want
to miss the show.”
    “And what a tragedy that would be.”
    “Tsk, tsk, Mare,” he teases, shaking
a finger at me. “This is supposed to be
fun.”
    “It’s supposed to be a warning, you
dumb fool.”
    But he’s already walking off with his
long strides, forcing me to almost trot to
keep up. His gait weaves, off balance.
Sea legs, he calls them, though he’s
never been to the far-off sea. I guess
long hours on his master’s fishing boat,
even on the river, are bound to have
some effect.
    Like my dad, Kilorn’s father was
sent off to war, but whereas mine
returned missing a leg and a lung, Mr.
Warren came back in a shoe box.
Kilorn’s mother ran off after that,
leaving her young son to fend for
himself. He almost starved to death but
somehow kept picking fights with me. I
fed him so that I wouldn’t have to kick
around a bag of bones, and now, ten
years later, here he is. At least he’s
apprenticed and won’t face the war.
    We get to the foot of the hill, where
the crowd is thicker, pushing and
prodding on all sides. First Friday
attendance is mandatory, unless you are,
like my sister, an “essential laborer.” As
if embroidering silk is essential. But the
Silvers love their silk, don’t they? Even
the Security officers, a few of them
anyway, can be bribed with pieces sewn
by my sister. Not that I know anything
about that.
    The shadows around us deepen as
we climb up the stone stairs, toward the
crest of the hill. Kilorn takes them two at
a time, almost leaving me behind, but he
stops to wait. He smirks down at me and
tosses a lock of faded, tawny hair out of
his green eyes.
    “Sometimes I forget you have the
legs of a child.”
    “Better than the brain of one,” I snap,
giving him a light smack on the cheek as
I pass. His laughter follows me up the
steps.
    “You’re grouchier than usual.”
    “I just hate these things.”
    “I know,” he murmurs, solemn for
once.
    And then we’re in the arena, the sun
blazing hot overhead. Built ten years
ago, the arena is easily the largest
structure in the Stilts. It’s nothing
compared to the colossal ones in the
cities, but still, the soaring arches of
steel, the thousands of feet of concrete,
are enough to make a village girl catch
her breath.
     Security officers are everywhere,
their black-and-silver uniforms standing
out in the crowd. This is First Friday,
and they can’t wait to watch the
proceedings. They carry long rifles or
pistols, though they don’t need them. As
is customary, the officers are Silvers,
and Silvers have nothing to fear from us
Reds. Everyone knows that. We are not
their equals, though you wouldn’t know
it from looking at us. The only thing that
serves to distinguish us, outwardly at
least, is that Silvers stand tall. Our backs
are bent by work and unanswered hope
and the inevitable disappointment with
our lot in life.
    Inside the open-topped arena is just
as hot as out, and Kilorn, always on his
toes, leads me to some shade. We don’t
get seats here, just long concrete
benches, but the few Silver nobles up
above enjoy cool, comfortable boxes.
There they have drinks, food, ice even in
high summer, cushioned chairs, electric
lights, and other comforts I’ll never
enjoy. The Silvers don’t bat an eye at
any of it, complaining about the
“wretched conditions.” I’ll give them a
wretched condition, if I ever have the
chance. All we get are hard benches and
a few screechy video screens almost too
bright and too noisy to stand.
    “Bet you a day’s wages it’s another
strongarm today,” Kilorn says, tossing
his apple core toward the arena floor.
    “No bet,” I shoot back at him. Many
Reds gamble their earnings on the fights,
hoping to win a little something to help
them get through another week. But not
me, not even with Kilorn. It’s easier to
cut the bookie’s purse than try to win
money from it. “You shouldn’t waste
your money like that.”
    “It’s not a waste if I’m right. It’s
always a strongarm beating up on
someone.”
    Strongarms usually make up at least
one-half of the fights, their skills and
abilities better suited to the arena than
almost any other Silver. They seem to
revel in it, using their superhuman
strength to toss other champions around
like rag dolls.
     “What about the other one?” I ask,
thinking about the range of Silvers that
could appear. Telkies, swifts, nymphs,
greenys, stoneskins—all of them terrible
to watch.
     “Not sure. Hopefully something
cool. I could use some fun.”
     Kilorn and I don’t really see eye to
eye on the Feats of First Friday. For me,
watching two champions rip into each
other is not enjoyable, but Kilorn loves
i t. Let them ruin each other, he says.
They’re not our people.
     He doesn’t understand what the
Feats are about. This isn’t mindless
entertainment, meant to give us some
respite from grueling work. This is
calculated, cold, a message. Only
Silvers can fight in the arenas because
only a Silver can survive the arena. They
fight to show us their strength and
power. You are no match for us . We are
your betters. We are gods . It’s written
in every superhuman blow the
champions land.
    And they’re absolutely right. Last
month I watched a swift battle a telky
and, though the swift could move faster
than the eye could see, the telky stopped
him cold. With just the power of his
mind, he lifted the other fighter right off
the ground. The swift started to choke; I
think the telky had some invisible grip
on his throat. When the swift’s face
turned blue, they called the match.
Kilorn cheered. He’d bet on the telky.
    “Ladies and gentlemen, Silvers and
Reds, welcome to First Friday, the Feat
of August.” The announcer’s voice
echoes around the arena, magnified by
the walls. He sounds bored, as usual,
and I don’t blame him.
    Once, the Feats were not matches at
all, but executions. Prisoners and
enemies of the state would be
transported to Archeon, the capital, and
killed in front of a Silver crowd. I guess
the Silvers liked that, and the matches
began. Not to kill but to entertain. Then
they became the Feats and spread out to
the other cities, to different arenas and
different audiences. Eventually the Reds
were granted admission, confined to the
cheap seats. It wasn’t long until the
Silvers built arenas everywhere, even
villages like the Stilts, and attendance
that was once a gift became a mandatory
curse. My brother Shade says it’s
because arena cities enjoyed a marked
reduction in Red crime, dissent, even the
few acts of rebellion. Now Silvers don’t
have to use execution or the legions or
even Security to keep the peace; two
champions can scare us just as easily.
    Today, the two in question look up to
the job. The first to walk out onto the
white sand is announced as Cantos
Carros, a Silver from Harbor Bay in the
east. The video screen blares a clear
picture of the warrior, and no one needs
to tell me this is a strongarm. He has
arms like tree trunks, corded and veined
and straining against his own skin. When
he smiles, I can see all his teeth are gone
or broken. Maybe he ran afoul of his
own toothbrush when he was a growing
boy.
    Next to me, Kilorn cheers and the
other villagers roar with him. A Security
officer throws a loaf of bread at the
louder ones for their trouble. To my left,
another hands a screaming child a bright
yellow piece of paper. ’Lec papers—
extra electricity rations. All of it to make
us cheer, to make us scream, to force us
to watch, even if we don’t want to.
    “That’s right, let him hear you!” the
announcer drawls, forcing as much
enthusiasm into his voice as he can.
“And here we have his opponent,
straight from the capital, Samson
Merandus.”
    The other warrior looks pale and
weedy next to the human-shaped hunk of
muscle, but his blue steel armor is fine
and polished to a high sheen. He’s
probably the second son of a second son,
trying to win renown in the arena.
Though he should be scared, he looks
strangely calm.
    His last name sounds familiar, but
that’s not unusual. Many Silvers belong
to famous families, called houses, with
dozens of members. The governing
family of our region, the Capital Valley,
is House Welle, though I’ve never seen
Governor Welle in my life. He never
visits it more than once or twice a year,
and even then, he never stoops to
entering a Red village like mine. I saw
his riverboat once, a sleek thing with
green-and-gold flags. He’s a greeny, and
when he passed, the trees on the bank
burst into blossom and flowers popped
out of the ground. I thought it was
beautiful, until one of the older boys
threw rocks at his boat. The stones fell
harmlessly into the river. They put the
boy in the stocks anyway.
    “It’ll be the strongarm for sure.”
    Kilorn frowns at the small champion.
“How do you know? What’s Samson’s
power?”
    “Who cares, he’s still going to lose,”
I scoff, settling in to watch.
    The usual call rings out over the
arena. Many rise to their feet, eager to
watch, but I stay seated in silent protest.
As calm as I might look, anger boils in
my skin. Anger, and jealousy. We are
gods, echoes in my head.
    “Champions, set your feet.”
    They do, digging in their heels on
opposite sides of the arena. Guns aren’t
allowed in arena fights, so Cantos draws
a short, wide sword. I doubt he’ll need
it. Samson produces no weapon, his
fingers merely twitching by his side.
    A low, humming electric tone runs
through the arena. I hate this part. The
sound vibrates in my teeth, in my bones,
pulsing until I think something might
shatter. It ends abruptly with a chirping
chime. It begins. I exhale.
    It looks like a bloodbath right away.
Cantos barrels forward like a bull,
kicking up sand in his wake. Samson
tries to dodge Cantos, using his shoulder
to slide around the Silver, but the
strongarm is quick. He gets hold of
Samson’s leg and tosses him across the
arena like he’s made of feathers. The
subsequent cheers cover Samson’s roar
of pain as he collides with the cement
wall, but it’s written on his face. Before
he can hope to stand, Cantos is over him,
heaving him skyward. He hits the sand in
a heap of what can only be broken bones
but somehow rises to his feet again.
    “Is he a punching bag?” Kilorn
laughs. “Let him have it, Cantos!”
    Kilorn doesn’t care about an extra
loaf of bread or a few more minutes of
electricity. That’s not why he cheers. He
honestly wants to see blood, Silver
blood—silverblood—stain the arena. It
doesn’t matter that the blood is
everything we aren’t, everything we
can’t be, everything we want. He just
needs to see it and trick himself into
thinking they are truly human, that they
can be hurt and defeated. But I know
better. Their blood is a threat, a
warning, a promise. We are not the
same and never will be.
    He’s not disappointed. Even the box
seats can see the metallic, iridescent
liquid dripping from Samson’s mouth. It
reflects the summer sun like a watery
mirror, painting a river down his neck
and into his armor.
    This is the true division between
Silvers and Reds: the color of our
blood. This simple difference somehow
makes them stronger, smarter, better
than us.
    Samson spits, sending a sunburst of
silverblood across the arena. Ten yards
away, Cantos tightens his grip on his
sword, ready to incapacitate Samson and
end this.
    “Poor fool,” I mutter. It seems
Kilorn is right. Nothing but a punching
bag.
    Cantos pounds through the sand,
sword held high, eyes on fire. And then
he freezes midstep, his armor clanking
with the sudden stop. From the middle of
the arena, the bleeding warrior points at
Cantos, with a stare to break bone.
    Samson flicks his fingers and Cantos
walks, perfectly in time with Samson’s
movements. His mouth falls open, like
he’s gone slow or stupid. Like his mind
is gone.
    I can’t believe my eyes.
    A deathly quiet falls over the arena
as we watch, not understanding the scene
below us. Even Kilorn has nothing to
say.
    “A whisper,” I breathe aloud.
    Never before have I seen one in the
arena—I doubt anyone has. Whispers
are rare, dangerous, and powerful, even
among the Silvers, even in the capital.
The rumors about them vary, but it boils
down to something simple and chilling:
they can enter your head, read your
thoughts, and control your mind. And
this is exactly what Samson is doing,
having whispered his way past Cantos’s
armor and muscle, into his very brain,
where there are no defenses.
    Cantos raises his sword, hands
trembling. He’s trying to fight Samson’s
power. But strong as he is, there’s no
fighting the enemy in his mind.
    Another twist of Samson’s hand and
silverblood splashes across the sand as
Cantos plunges his sword straight
through his armor, into the flesh of his
own stomach. Even up in the seats, I can
hear the sickening squelch of metal
cutting through meat.
    As the blood gushes from Cantos,
gasps echo across the arena. We’ve
never seen so much blood here before.
    Blue lights flash to life, bathing the
arena floor in a ghostly glow, signaling
the end of the match. Silver healers run
across the sand, rushing to the fallen
Cantos. Silvers aren’t supposed to die
here. Silvers are supposed to fight
bravely, to flaunt their skills, to put on a
good show—but not die. After all, they
aren’t Reds.
    Officers move faster than I’ve ever
seen before. A few are swifts, rushing to
and fro in a blur as they herd us out.
They don’t want us around if Cantos dies
on the sand. Meanwhile, Samson strides
from the arena like a titan. His gaze falls
on Cantos’s body, and I expect him to
look apologetic. Instead, his face is
blank, emotionless, and so cold. The
match was nothing to him. We are
nothing to him.
    In school, we learned about the
world before ours, about the angels and
gods that lived in the sky, ruling the earth
with kind and loving hands. Some say
those are just stories, but I don’t believe
that.
    The gods rule us still. They have
come down from the stars. And they are
no longer kind.
                TWO

Our house is small, even by Stilts
standards, but at least we have a view.
Before his injury, during one of his army
leaves, Dad built the house high so we
could see across the river. Even through
the haze of summer you can see the
cleared pockets of land that were once
forest, now logged into oblivion. They
look like a disease, but to the north and
west, the untouched hills are a calm
reminder. There is so much more out
there. Beyond us, beyond the Silvers,
beyond everything I know.
    I climb the ladder up to the house,
over worn wood shaped to the hands that
ascend and descend every day. From this
height I can see a few boats heading
upriver, proudly flying their bright flags.
Silvers. They’re the only ones rich
enough to use private transportation.
While they enjoy wheeled transports,
pleasure boats, even high-flying airjets,
we get nothing more than our own two
feet, or a push cycle if we’re lucky.
     The boats must be heading to
Summerton, the small city that springs to
life around the king’s summer residence.
Gisa was there today, aiding the
seamstress she is apprenticed to. They
often go to the market there when the
king visits, to sell her wares to the
Silver merchants and nobles who follow
the royals like ducklings. The palace
itself is known as the Hall of the Sun,
and it’s supposed to be a marvel, but
I’ve never seen it. I don’t know why the
royals have a second house, especially
since the capital palace is so fine and
beautiful. But like all Silvers, they don’t
act out of need. They are driven by want.
And what they want, they get.
    Before I open the door to the usual
chaos, I pat the flag fluttering from the
porch. Three red stars on yellowed
fabric, one for each brother, and room
for more. Room for me. Most houses
have flags like this, some with black
stripes instead of stars in quiet reminder
of dead children.
     Inside, Mom sweats over the stove,
stirring a pot of stew while my father
glares at it from his wheelchair. Gisa
embroiders at the table, making
something beautiful and exquisite and
entirely beyond my comprehension.
     “I’m home,” I say to no one in
particular. Dad answers with a wave,
Mom a nod, and Gisa doesn’t look up
from her scrap of silk.
     I drop my pouch of stolen goods next
to her, letting the coins jingle as much as
they can. “I think I’ve got enough to get a
proper cake for Dad’s birthday. And
more batteries, enough to last the
month.”
     Gisa eyes the pouch, frowning with
distaste. She’s only fourteen but sharp
for her age. “One day people are going
to come and take everything you have.”
    “Jealousy doesn’t become you,
Gisa,” I scold, patting her on the head.
Her hands fly up to her perfect, glossy
red hair, brushing it back into her
meticulous bun.
    I’ve always wanted her hair, though
I’d never tell her that. Where hers is like
fire, my hair is what we call river
brown. Dark at the root, pale at the ends,
as the color leeches from our hair with
the stress of Stilts life. Most keep their
hair short to hide their gray ends but I
don’t. I like the reminder that even my
hair knows life shouldn’t be this way.
    “I’m not jealous,” she huffs,
returning to her work. She stitches
flowers made of fire, each one a
beautiful flame of thread against oily
black silk.
     “That’s beautiful, Gee.” I let my
hand trace one of the flowers, marveling
at the silky feel of it. She glances up and
smiles softly, showing even teeth. As
much as we fight, she knows she’s my
little star.
     And everyone knows I’m the jealous
one, Gisa. I can’t do anything but steal
from people who can actually do
things.
     Once       she        finishes     her
apprenticeship, she’ll be able to open
her own shop. Silvers will come from
all around to pay her for handkerchiefs
and flags and clothing. Gisa will achieve
what few Reds do and live well. She’ll
provide for our parents and give me and
my brothers menial jobs to get us out of
the war. Gisa is going to save us one
day, with nothing more than needle and
thread.
    “Night and day, my girls,” Mom
mutters, running a finger through graying
hair. She doesn’t mean it as an insult but
a prickly truth. Gisa is skilled, pretty,
and sweet. I’m a bit rougher, as Mom
kindly puts it. The dark to Gisa’s light. I
suppose the only common things
between us are the shared earrings, the
memory of our brothers.
    Dad wheezes from his corner and
hammers his chest with a fist. This is
common, since he has only one real lung.
Luckily the skill of a Red medic saved
him, replacing the collapsed lung with a
device that could breathe for him. It
wasn’t a Silver invention, as they have
no need for such things. They have the
healers. But healers don’t waste their
time saving the Reds, or even working
on the front lines keeping soldiers alive.
Most of them remain in the cities,
prolonging the lives of ancient Silvers,
mending livers destroyed by alcohol and
the like. So we’re forced to indulge in an
underground market of technology and
inventions to help better ourselves.
Some are foolish, most don’t work—but
a bit of clicking metal saved my dad’s
life. I can always hear it ticking away, a
tiny pulse to keep Dad breathing.
     “I don’t want cake,” he grumbles. I
don’t miss his glance toward his
growing belly.
     “Well, tell me what you do want,
Dad. A new watch or—”
     “Mare, I do not consider something
you stole off someone’s wrist to be
new.”
     Before another war can brew in the
Barrow house, Mom pulls the stew off
the stove. “Dinner is served.” She brings
it to the table, and the fumes wash over
me.
     “It smells great, Mom,” Gisa lies.
Dad is not so tactful and grimaces at the
meal.
    Not wanting to be shown up, I force
down some stew. It’s not as bad as
usual, to my pleasant surprise. “You
used that pepper I brought you?”
    Instead of nodding and smiling and
thanking me for noticing, she flushes and
doesn’t answer. She knows I stole it, just
like all my gifts.
    Gisa rolls her eyes over her soup,
sensing where this is going.
    You’d think by now I’d be used to it,
but their disapproval wears on me.
    Sighing, Mom lowers her face into
her hands. “Mare, you know I appreciate
—I just wish—”
    I finish for her. “That I was like
Gisa?”
    Mom shakes her head. Another lie.
“No, of course not. That’s not what I
meant.”
    “Right.” I’m sure they can sense my
bitterness on the other side of the
village. I try my best to keep my voice
from breaking. “It’s the only way I can
help out before—before I go away.”
    Mentioning the war is a quick way to
silence my house. Even Dad’s wheezing
stops. Mom turns her head, her cheeks
flushing red with anger. Under the table,
Gisa’s hand closes around mine.
    “I know you’re doing everything you
can, for the right reasons,” Mom
whispers. It takes a lot for her to say
this, but it comforts me all the same.
     I keep my mouth shut and force a
nod.
     Then Gisa jumps in her seat, like
she’s been shocked. “Oh, I almost
forgot. I stopped at the post on the way
back from Summerton. There was a
letter from Shade.”
     It’s like setting off a bomb. Mom and
Dad scramble, reaching for the dirty
envelope Gisa pulls out of her jacket. I
let them pass it over, examining the
paper. Neither can read, so they glean
whatever they can from the paper itself.
     Dad sniffs the letter, trying to place
the scent. “Pine. Not smoke. That’s
good. He’s away from the Choke.”
     We all breathe a sigh of relief at that.
The Choke is the bombed-out strip of
land connecting Norta to the Lakelands,
where most of the war is fought.
Soldiers spend the majority of their time
there, ducking in trenches doomed to
explode or making daring pushes that
end in a massacre. The rest of the border
is mainly lake, though in the far north it
becomes tundra too cold and barren to
fight over. Dad was injured at the Choke
years ago, when a bomb dropped on his
unit. Now the Choke is so destroyed by
decades of battle, the smoke of
explosions is a constant fog and nothing
can grow there. It’s dead and gray, like
the future of the war.
    He finally passes the letter over for
me to read, and I open it with great
anticipation, both eager and afraid to see
what Shade has to say.

      Dear family, I am alive.
   Obviously.

    That gets a chuckle out of Dad and
me, and even a smile from Gisa. Mom is
not as amused, even though Shade starts
every letter like this.

       We’ve been called away
   from the front, as Dad the
   Bloodhound      has     probably
   guessed. It’s nice, getting back
   to the main camps. It’s Red as
   the dawn up here, you barely
   even see the Silver officers. And
   without the Choke smoke, you
   can actually see the sun rise
   stronger every day. But I won’t
   be in for long. Command plans
   to repurpose the unit for lake
   combat, and we’ve been
   assigned to one of the new
   warships. I met a medic
   detached from her unit who said
   she knew Tramy and that he’s
   fine. Took a bit of shrapnel
   retreating from the Choke, but
   he recovered nicely. No
   infection,    no     permanent
   damage.

   Mom sighs aloud, shaking her head.
“No permanent damage,” she scoffs.
    Still nothing about Bree but
I’m not worried. He’s the best
of us, and he’s coming up on his
five-year leave. He’ll be home
soon, Mom, so stop your
worrying. Nothing else to
report, at least that I can write
in a letter. Gisa, don’t be too
much of a show-off even though
you deserve to be. Mare, don’t
be such a brat all the time, and
stop beating up that Warren
boy. Dad, I’m proud of you.
Always. Love all of you.
    Your favorite son and
brother, Shade.

Like always, Shade’s words pierce
through us. I can almost hear his voice if
I try hard enough. Then the lights above
us suddenly start to whine.
     “Did no one put in the ration papers I
got yesterday?” I ask before the lights
flicker off, plunging us into darkness. As
my eyes adjust, I can just see Mom
shaking her head.
     Gisa groans. “Can we not do this
again?” Her chair scrapes as she stands
up. “I’m going to bed. Try not to yell.”
     But we don’t yell. Seems to be the
way of my world—too tired to fight.
Mom and Dad retreat to their bedroom,
leaving me alone at the table. Normally
I’d slip out, but I can’t find the will to do
much more than go to sleep.
     I climb up yet another ladder to the
loft, where Gisa is already snoring. She
can sleep like no other, dropping off in a
minute or so, while it can sometimes
take me hours. I settle into my cot,
content to simply lie there and hold
Shade’s letter. Like Dad said, it smells
strongly of pine.
     The river sounds nice tonight,
tripping over stones in the bank as it
lulls me to sleep. Even the old fridge, a
rusty battery-run machine that usually
whines so hard it hurts my head, doesn’t
trouble me tonight. But then a birdcall
interrupts my descent into sleep. Kilorn.
     No. Go away.
     Another call, louder this time. Gisa
stirs a little, rolling over into her pillow.
    Grumbling to myself, hating Kilorn, I
roll out of my cot and slide down the
ladder. Anyone else would have tripped
over the clutter in the main room, but I
have great footing thanks to years of
running from officers. I’m down the stilt
ladder in a second, landing ankle-deep
in the mud. Kilorn is waiting, appearing
out of the shadows beneath the house.
    “I hope you like black eyes because I
have no problem giving you one for this
—”
    The sight of his face stops me short.
    He’s been crying. Kilorn does not
cry. His knuckles are bleeding too, and I
bet there’s a wall hurting just as hard
somewhere nearby. In spite of myself, in
spite of the late hour, I can’t help but
feel concerned, even scared for him.
    “What is it? What’s wrong?”
Without thinking, I take his hand in mine,
feeling the blood beneath my fingers.
“What happened?”
    He takes a moment to respond,
working himself up. Now I’m terrified.
    “My master—he fell. He died. I’m
not an apprentice anymore.”
    I try to hold in a gasp, but it echoes
anyway, taunting us. Even though he
doesn’t have to, even though I know
what he’s trying to say, he continues.
    “I hadn’t even finished training and
now—” He trips over his words. “I’m
eighteen. The other fishermen have
apprentices. I’m not working. I can’t get
work.”
   The next words are like a knife in my
heart. Kilorn draws a ragged breath, and
somehow I wish I wouldn’t have to hear
him.
   “They’re going to send me to the
war.”
               THREE

It’s been going on for the better part of
the last hundred years. I don’t think it
should even be called a war anymore,
but there isn’t a word for this higher
form of destruction. In school they told
us it started over land. The Lakelands
are flat and fertile, bordered by immense
lakes full of fish. Not like the rocky,
forested hills of Norta, where the
farmlands can barely feed us. Even the
Silvers felt the strain, so the king
declared war, plunging us into a conflict
neither side could really win.
     The Lakelander king, another Silver,
responded in kind, with the full support
of his own nobility. They wanted our
rivers, to get access to a sea that wasn’t
frozen half the year, and the water mills
dotting our rivers. The mills are what
make our country strong, providing
enough electricity so that even the Reds
can have some. I’ve heard rumors of
cities farther south, near the capital,
Archeon, where greatly skilled Reds
build       machines      beyond       my
comprehension. For transport on land,
water, and sky, or weapons to rain
destruction wherever the Silvers might
need. Our teacher proudly told us Norta
was the light of the world, a nation made
great by our technology and power. All
the rest, like the Lakelands or Piedmont
to the south, live in darkness. We were
lucky to be born here. Lucky. The word
makes me want to scream.
     But despite our electricity, the
Lakelander food, our weapons, their
numbers, neither side has much
advantage over the other. Both have
Silver officers and Red soldiers, fighting
with abilities and guns and the shield of
a thousand Red bodies. A war that was
supposed to end less than a century ago
still drags on. I always found it funny
that we fought over food and water.
Even the high-and-mighty Silvers need
to eat.
     But it isn’t funny now, not when
Kilorn is going to be the next person I
say good-bye to. I wonder if he’ll give
me an earring so I can remember him
when the polished legionnaire takes him
away.
    “One week, Mare. One week and
I’m gone.” His voice cracks, though he
coughs to try to cover it up. “I can’t do
this. They—they won’t take me.”
    But I can see the fight going out of
his eyes.
    “There must be something we can
do,” I blurt out.
    “There’s nothing anyone can do. No
one has escaped conscription and
lived.”
    He doesn’t need to tell me that.
Every year, someone tries to run. And
every year, they’re dragged back to the
town square and hanged.
     “No. We’ll find a way.”
     Even now, he finds the strength to
smirk at me. “We?”
     The heat in my cheeks surges faster
than any flame. “I’m doomed for
conscription same as you, but they’re not
going to get me either. So we run.”
     The army has always been my fate,
my punishment, I know that. But not his.
It’s already taken too much from him.
     “There’s nowhere we can go,” he
sputters, but at least he’s arguing. At
least he’s not giving up. “We’d never
survive the north in winter, the east is
the sea, the west is more war, the south
is radiated to all hell—and everywhere
in between is crawling with Silvers and
Security.”
    The words pour out of me like a
river. “So is the village. Crawling with
Silvers and Security. And we manage to
steal right under their noses and escape
with our heads.” My mind races, trying
my hardest to find something, anything,
that might be of use. And then it hits me
like a bolt of lightning. “The black-
market trade, the one we help keep
running, smuggles everything from grain
to lightbulbs. Who’s to say they can’t
smuggle people?”
    His mouth opens, about to spout a
thousand reasons why this won’t work.
But then he smiles. And nods.
    I don’t like getting involved with
other people’s business. I don’t have
time for it. And yet here I am, listening
to myself say four dooming words.
    “Leave everything to me.”

The things we can’t sell to the usual
shop owners we have to take to Will
Whistle. He’s old, too feeble to work the
lumberyards, so he sweeps the streets by
day. At night, he sells everything you
could want out of his moldy wagon, from
heavily restricted coffee to exotics from
Archeon. I was nine with a fistful of
stolen buttons when I took my chances
with Will. He paid me three copper
pennies for them, no questions asked.
Now I’m his best customer and probably
the reason he manages to stay afloat in
such a small place. On a good day I
might even call him a friend. It was
years before I discovered Will was part
of a much larger operation. Some call it
the underground, others the black market,
but all I care about is what they can do.
They have fences, people like Will,
everywhere. Even in Archeon, as
impossible as that sounds. They
transport illegal goods all over the
country. And now I’m betting that they
might make an exception and transport a
person instead.
    “Absolutely not.”
    In eight years, Will has never said no
to me. Now the wrinkled old fool is
practically slamming shut the doors of
his wagon in my face. I’m happy Kilorn
stayed behind, so he doesn’t have to see
me fail him.
    “Will, please. I know you can do it
—”
    He shakes head, white beard
waggling. “Even if I could, I am a
tradesman. The people I work with
aren’t the type to spend their time and
effort shuttling another runner from place
to place. It’s not our business.”
    I can feel my only hope, Kilorn’s
only hope, slipping right through my
fingers.
    Will must see the desperation in my
eyes because he softens, leaning against
the wagon door. He heaves a sigh and
glances backward, into the darkness of
the wagon. After a moment, he turns
back around and gestures, beckoning me
inside. I follow gladly.
    “Thank you, Will,” I babble. “You
don’t know what this means to me—”
    “Sit down and be quiet, girl,” a high
voice says.
    Out of the shadows of the wagon,
hardly visible in the dim light of Will’s
single blue candle, a woman rises to her
feet. Girl, I should say, since she barely
looks older than me. But she’s much
taller, with the air of an old warrior. The
gun at her hip, tucked into a red sash belt
stamped with suns, is certainly not
authorized. She’s too blond and fair to
be from the Stilts, and judging by the
light sweat on her face, she’s not used to
the heat or humidity. She is a foreigner,
an outlander, and an outlaw at that. Just
the person I want to see.
    She waves me to the bench cut into
the wagon wall, and she sits down again
only when I have. Will follows closely
behind and all but collapses into a worn
chair, his eyes flitting between the girl
and me.
    “Mare Barrow, meet Farley,” he
murmurs, and she tightens her jaw.
    Her gaze lands on my face. “You
wish to transport cargo.”
    “Myself and a boy—” But she holds
up a large, callused hand, cutting me off.
    “Cargo,” she says again, eyes full of
meaning. My heart leaps in my chest; this
Farley girl might be of the helping kind.
“And what is the destination?”
    I rack my brain, trying to think of
somewhere safe. The old classroom map
swims before my eyes, outlining the
coast and the rivers, marking cities and
villages and everything in between.
From Harbor Bay west to the Lakelands,
the northern tundra to the radiated
wastes of the Ruins and the Wash, it’s
all dangerous land for us.
    “Somewhere safe from the Silvers.
That’s all.”
    Farley blinks at me, her expression
unchanging. “Safety has a price, girl.”
    “Everything has a price, girl,” I fire
back, matching her tone. “No one knows
that more than me.”
    A long beat of silence stretches
through the wagon. I can feel the night
wasting away, taking precious minutes
from Kilorn. Farley must sense my
unease and impatience but makes no
hurry to speak. After what seems like an
eternity, her mouth finally opens.
    “The Scarlet Guard accepts, Mare
Barrow.”
    It takes all the restraint I have to
keep from jumping out of my seat with
joy. But something tugs at me, keeping a
smile from crossing my face.
    “Payment is expected in full, to the
equivalent of one thousand crowns,”
Farley continues.
    That almost knocks the air from my
lungs. Even Will looks surprised, his
fluffy white eyebrows disappearing into
his hairline. “A thousand?” I manage to
choke out. No one deals in that amount
of money, not in the Stilts. That could
feed my family for a year. Many years.
     But Farley isn’t finished. I get the
sense that she enjoys this. “This can be
paid in paper notes, tetrarch coins, or the
bartering equivalent. Per item, of
course.”
     Two thousand crowns . A fortune.
Our freedom is worth a fortune.
     “Your cargo will be moved the day
after tomorrow. You must pay then.”
     I can barely breathe. Less than two
days to accumulate more money than I
have stolen in my entire life. There is no
way.
    She doesn’t even give me time to
protest.
    “Do you accept the terms?”
    “I need more time.”
    She shakes her head and leans
forward. I smell gunpowder on her. “Do
you accept the terms?”
    It is impossible. It is foolish. It is
our best chance.
    “I accept the terms.”

The next moments pass in a blur as I
trudge home through the muddy shadows.
My mind is on fire, trying to figure out a
way to get my hands on anything worth
even close to Farley’s price. There’s
nothing in the Stilts, that’s for sure.
     Kilorn is still waiting in the
darkness, looking like a little lost boy. I
suppose he is.
     “Bad news?” he says, trying to keep
his voice even, but it trembles anyway.
     “The underground can get us out of
here.” For his sake, I keep myself calm
as I explain. Two thousand crowns might
as well be the king’s throne, but I make
it seem like nothing. “If anyone can do it,
we can. We can.”
     “Mare.” His voice is cold, colder
than winter, but the hollow look in his
eyes is worse. “It’s over. We lost.”
     “But if we just—”
     He grabs my shoulders, holding me
at an arm’s length in his firm grip. It
doesn’t hurt but it shocks me all the
same. “Don’t do this to me, Mare. Don’t
make believe there’s a way out of this.
Don’t give me hope.”
    He’s right. It’s cruel to give hope
where none should be. It only turns into
disappointment, resentment, rage—all
the things that make this life more
difficult than it already is.
    “Just let me accept it. Maybe—
maybe then I can actually get my head in
order, get myself trained properly, give
myself a fighting chance out there.”
    My hands find his wrists and I hold
on tight. “You talk like you’re already
dead.”
    “Maybe I am.”
    “My brothers—”
    “Your father made sure they knew
what they were doing long before they
went away. And it helps that they’re all
the size of a house.” He forces a smirk,
trying to get me to laugh. It doesn’t work.
“I’m a good swimmer and sailor.
They’ll need me on the lakes.”
    It’s only when he wraps his arms
around me, hugging me, that I realize I’m
shaking. “Kilorn—,” I mumble into his
chest. But the next words won’t come. It
should be me. But my time is fast
approaching. I can only hope Kilorn
survives long enough for me to see him
again, in the barracks or in a trench.
Maybe then I’ll find the right words to
say. Maybe then I’ll understand how I
feel.
     “Thank you, Mare. For everything.”
He pulls back, letting go of me far too
quickly. “If you save up, you’ll have
enough by the time the legion comes for
you.”
     For him, I nod. But I have no plans
of letting him fight and die alone.
     By the time I settle down into my cot,
I know I will not sleep tonight. There
must be something I can do, and even if
it takes all night, I’m going to figure it
out.
     Gisa coughs in her sleep and it’s a
courteous, tiny sound. Even unconscious,
she manages to be ladylike. No wonder
she fits in so well with the Silvers.
She’s everything they like in a Red:
quiet, content, and unassuming. It’s a
good thing she’s the one who has to deal
with them, helping the superhuman fools
pick out silk and fine fabrics for clothes
they’ll wear just once. She says you get
used to it, to the amount of money they
spend on such trivial things. And at
Grand Garden, the marketplace in
Summerton, the money increases tenfold.
Together with her mistress, Gisa sews
lace, silk, fur, even gemstones to create
wearable art for the Silver elite who
seem to follow the royals everywhere.
The parade, she calls them, an endless
march of preening peacocks, each one
more proud and ridiculous than the next.
All Silver, all silly, and all status-
obsessed.
    I hate them even more than usual
tonight. The stockings they lose would
probably be enough to save me, Kilorn,
and half the Stilts from conscription.
    For the second time tonight, lightning
strikes.
    “Gisa. Wake up.” I do not whisper.
The girl sleeps like the dead. “Gisa.”
    She shifts and groans into her
pillow. “Sometimes I want to kill you,”
she grumbles.
    “How sweet. Now wake up!”
    Her eyes are still closed when I
pounce, landing on her like a giant cat.
Before she can start yelling and whining
and get my mother involved, I clamp a
hand on her mouth. “Just listen to me,
that’s all. Don’t talk, just listen.”
     She huffs against my hand but nods
all the same.
     “Kilorn—”
     Her skin flushes bright red at the
mention of him. She even giggles,
something she never does. But I don’t
have time for her schoolgirl crush, not
now.
     “Stop that, Gisa.” I take a shaky
breath. “Kilorn is going to be
conscripted.”
     And then her laughter is gone.
Conscription isn’t a joke, not to us.
     “I’ve found a way to get him out of
here, to save him from the war, but I
need your help to do it.” It hurts to say it,
but somehow the words pass my lips. “I
need you, Gisa. Will you help me?”
    She doesn’t hesitate to answer, and I
feel a great swell of love for my sister.
    “Yes.”

It’s a good thing I’m short, or else
Gisa’s extra uniform would never fit.
It’s thick and dark, not at all suited to the
summer sun, with buttons and zippers
that seem to cook in the heat. The pack
on my back shifts, almost taking me over
with the weight of cloth and sewing
instruments. Gisa has her own pack and
constricting uniform, but they don’t seem
to bother her at all. She’s used to hard
work and a hard life.
     We sail most of the distance upriver,
squashed between bushels of wheat on
the barge of a benevolent farmer Gisa
befriended years ago. People trust her
around here, like they can never trust me.
The farmer lets us off with a mile still to
go, near the winding trail of merchants
heading for Summerton. Now we shuffle
with them, toward what Gisa calls the
Garden Door, though there are no
gardens to be seen. It’s actually a gate
made of sparkling glass that blinds us
before we even get a chance to step
inside. The rest of the wall looks to be
made of the same thing, but I can’t
believe the Silver king would be stupid
enough to hide behind glass walls.
    “It isn’t glass,” Gisa tells me. “Or at
least, not entirely. The Silvers
discovered a way to heat diamond and
mix it with other materials. It’s totally
impregnable. Not even a bomb could get
through that.”
    Diamond walls.
    “That seems necessary.”
    “Keep your head down. Let me do
the talking,” she whispers.
    I stay on her heels, my eyes on the
road as it fades from cracked black
asphalt to paved white stone. It’s so
smooth I almost slip, but Gisa grabs my
arm, keeping me steady. Kilorn wouldn’t
have a problem walking on this, not with
his sea legs. But then Kilorn wouldn’t be
here at all. He’s already given up. I will
not.
    As we get closer to the gates, I
squint through the glare to see to the
other side. Though Summerton only
exists for the season, abandoned before
the first frostfall, it’s the biggest city
I’ve ever seen. There are bustling
streets, shops, cantina bars, houses, and
courtyards, all of them pointed toward a
shimmering monstrosity of diamondglass
and marble. And now I know where it
got its name. The Hall of the Sun shines
like a star, reaching a hundred feet into
the air in a twisting mass of spires and
bridges. Parts of it darken seemingly at
will, to give the occupants privacy.
Can’t have the peasants looking at the
king and his court. It’s breathtaking,
intimidating, magnificent—and this is
just the summer house.
    “Names,” a gruff voice barks, and
Gisa stops short.
    “Gisa Barrow. This is my sister,
Mare Barrow. She’s helping me bring
some wares in for my mistress.” She
doesn’t flinch, keeping her voice even,
almost bored. The Security officer nods
at me and I shift my pack, making a show
of it. Gisa hands over our identification
cards, both of them torn, dirty things
ready to fall apart, but they suffice.
    The man examining us must know my
sister because he barely glances at her
ID. Mine he scrutinizes, looking between
my face and my picture for a good
minute. I wonder if he’s a whisper too
and can read my mind. That would put
an end to this little excursion very
quickly and probably earn me a cable
noose around my neck.
    “Wrists,” he sighs, already bored
with us.
    For a moment, I’m puzzled, but Gisa
sticks out her right hand without a
thought. I follow the gesture, pointing my
arm at the officer. He slaps a pair of red
bands around our wrists. The circles
shrink until they’re tight as shackles—
there’s no removing these things on our
own.
    “Move along,” the officer says,
gesturing with a lazy wave of the hand.
Two young girls are not a threat in his
eyes.
    Gisa nods in thanks but I don’t. This
man doesn’t deserve an ounce of
appreciation from me. The gates yawn
open around us and we march forward.
My heartbeat pounds in my ears,
drowning out the sounds of Grand
Garden as we enter a different world.
    It’s a market like I’ve never seen,
dotted with flowers and trees and
fountains. The Reds are few and fast,
running errands and selling their own
wares, all marked by their red bands.
Though the Silvers wear no band,
they’re easy to spot. They drip with
gems and precious metals, a fortune on
every one of them. One slip of a hook
and I can go home with everything I’ll
ever need. All are tall and beautiful and
cold, moving with a slow grace no Red
can claim. We simply don’t have the
time to move that way.
    Gisa guides me past a bakery with
cakes dusted in gold, a grocer displaying
brightly colored fruits I’ve never seen
before, and even a menagerie full of
wild animals beyond my comprehension.
A little girl, Silver judging by her
clothes, feeds tiny bits of apple to a
spotted, horselike creature with an
impossibly long neck. A few streets
over, a jewelry store sparkles in every
color of the rainbow. I make note of it
but keeping my head straight here is
difficult. The air seems to pulse, vibrant
with life.
    Just when I think there could be
nothing more fantastic than this place, I
look closer at the Silvers and remember
exactly who they are. The little girl is a
telky, levitating the apple ten feet into
the air to feed the long-necked beast. A
florist runs his hands through a pot of
white flowers and they explode into
growth, curling around his elbows. He’s
a greeny, a manipulator of plants and the
earth. A pair of nymphs sits by the
fountain, lazily entertaining children
with floating orbs of water. One of them
has orange hair and hateful eyes, even
while kids mill around him. All over the
square, every type of Silver goes about
their extraordinary lives. There are so
many, each one grand and wonderful and
powerful and so far removed from the
world I know.
    “This is how the other half lives,”
Gisa murmurs, sensing my awe. “It’s
enough to make you sick.”
    Guilt ripples through me. I’ve
always been jealous of Gisa, her talent
and all the privileges it affords her, but
I’ve never thought of the cost. She didn’t
spend much time in school and has few
friends in the Stilts. If Gisa were normal,
she would have many. She would smile.
Instead, the fourteen-year-old girl
soldiers through with needle and thread,
putting the future of her family on her
back, living neck-deep in a world she
hates.
    “Thank you, Gee,” I whisper into her
ear. She knows I don’t just mean for
today.
    “Salla’s shop is there, with the blue
awning.” She points down a side street,
to a tiny store sandwiched between a
pair of cafés. “I’ll be inside, if you need
me.”
    “I won’t,” I answer quickly. “Even if
things go wrong, I won’t get you
involved.”
    “Good.” Then she grabs my hand,
squeezing tight for a second. “Be
careful. It’s crowded today, more than
usual.”
    “More places to hide,” I tell her with
a smirk.
    But her voice is grave. “More
officers too.”
    We continue walking, every step
bringing us closer to the exact moment
she’ll leave me alone in this strange
place. A thrum of panic goes through me
as Gisa gently lifts the pack from my
shoulders. We’ve reached her shop.
    To calm myself, I ramble under my
breath. “Speak to no one, don’t make eye
contact. Keep moving. I leave the way I
came, through the Garden Door. The
officer removes my band and I keep
walking.” She nods as I speak, her eyes
wide, wary and perhaps even hopeful.
“It’s ten miles to home.”
    “Ten miles to home,” she echoes.
    Wishing for all the world I could go
with her, I watch Gisa disappear beneath
the blue awning. She’s gotten me this far.
Now it’s my turn.
                FOUR

I’ve done this a thousand times before,
watching the crowd like a wolf does a
flock of sheep. Looking for the weak, the
slow, the foolish. Only now, I am very
much the prey. I might choose a swift
who’ll catch me in half a heartbeat, or
worse, a whisper who could probably
sense me coming a mile away. Even the
little telky girl can best me if things go
south. So I will have to be faster than
ever, smarter than ever, and worst of all,
luckier than ever. It’s maddening.
Fortunately, no one pays attention to
another Red servant, another insect
wandering past the feet of gods.
    I head back to the square, arms
hanging limp but ready at my sides.
Normally this is my dance, walking
through the most congested parts of a
crowd, letting my hands catch purses and
pockets like spiderwebs catching flies.
I’m not stupid enough to try that here.
Instead, I follow the crowd around the
square. Now I’m not blinded by my
fantastic surroundings but looking
beyond them, to the cracks in the stone
and the black-uniformed Security
officers in every shadow. The
impossible Silver world comes into
sharper focus. Silvers barely look at
each other, and they never smile. The
telky girl looks bored feeding her
strange beast, and merchants don’t even
haggle. Only the Reds look alive, darting
around the slow-moving men and women
of a better life. Despite the heat, the sun,
the bright banners, I have never seen a
place so cold.
    What concern me most are the black
video cameras hidden in the canopy or
alleyways. There are only a few at
home, at the Security outpost or in the
arena, but they’re all over the market. I
can just hear them humming in firm
reminder: someone else is watching
here.
    The tide of the crowd takes me down
the main avenue, past taverns and cafés.
Silvers sit at an open-air bar, watching
the crowd pass as they enjoy their
morning drinks. Some watch video
screens set into walls or hanging from
archways. Each one plays something
different, ranging from old arena
matches to news to brightly colored
programs I don’t understand, all
blending together in my head. The high
whine of the screens, the distant sound of
static, buzzes in my ears. How they can
stand it, I don’t know. But the Silvers
don’t even blink at the videos, almost
ignoring them entirely.
     The Hall itself casts a glimmering
shadow over me, and I find myself
staring in stupid awe again. But then a
droning noise snaps me out of it. At first
it sounds like the arena tone, the one
used to start a Feat, but this one is
different. Low and heavier somehow.
Without a thought, I turn to the noise.
    In the bar next to me, all the video
screens flicker to the same broadcast.
Not a royal address but a news report.
Even the Silvers stop to watch in rapt
silence. When the drone ends, the report
begins. A fluffy blond woman, Silver no
doubt, appears on the screen. She reads
from a piece of paper and looks
frightened.
    “Silvers of Norta, we apologize for
the interruption. Thirteen minutes ago
there was a terrorist attack in the
capital.”
    The Silvers around me gasp, bursting
into fearful murmurs.
    I can only blink in disbelief.
Terrorist attack? On the Silvers?
    Is that even possible?
    “This was an organized bombing of
government buildings in West Archeon.
According to reports, the Royal Court,
the Treasury Hall, and Whitefire Palace
have been damaged, but the court and the
treasury were not in session this
morning.” The image changes from the
woman to footage of a burning building.
Security officers evacuate the people
inside while nymphs blast water onto the
flames. Healers, marked by a black-and-
red cross on their arms, run to and fro
among them. “The royal family was not
in residence at Whitefire, and there are
no reported casualties at this time. King
Tiberias is expected to address the
nation within the hour.”
    A Silver next to me clenches his fist
and pounds on the bar, sending spider
cracks through the solid rock top. A
strongarm. “It’s the Lakelanders!
They’re losing up north so they’re
coming down south to scare us!” A few
jeer with him, cursing the Lakelands.
    “We should wipe them out, push all
the way through to Prairie!” another
Silver echoes. Many cheer in agreement.
It takes all my strength not to snap at
these cowards who will never see the
front lines or send their children to fight.
Their Silver war is being paid for in
Red blood.
    As more and more footage rolls,
showing the marble facade of the
courthouse explode into dust or a
diamondglass wall withstanding a
fireball, part of me feels happy. The
Silvers are not invincible. They have
enemies, enemies who can hurt them,
and for once, they aren’t hiding behind a
Red shield.
    The newscaster returns, paler than
ever. Someone whispers to her offscreen
and she shuffles through her notes, her
hands shaking. “It seems that an
organization has taken responsibility for
the Archeon bombing,” she says,
stumbling a bit. The shouting men quiet
quickly, eager to hear the words on-
screen. “A terrorist group calling
themselves the Scarlet Guard released
this video moments ago.”
    “The Scarlet Guard?” “Who the hell
—?” “Some kind of trick—?” and other
confused questions rise around the bar.
No one has heard of the Scarlet Guard
before.
    But I have.
    That’s what Farley called herself.
Her and Will. But they are smugglers,
both of them, not terrorists or bombers
or whatever else the broadcast might
say. It’s a coincidence, it can’t be them.
    On-screen, I’m greeted by a terrible
sight. A woman stands in front of a shaky
camera, a scarlet bandanna tied around
her face so only her golden hair and keen
blue eyes shine out. She holds a gun in
one hand, a tattered red flag in another.
And on her chest, there’s a bronze badge
in the shape of a torn-apart sun.
     “We are the Scarlet Guard and we
stand for the freedom and equality of all
people—,” the woman says. I recognize
her voice.
     Farley.
     “—starting with the Reds.”
     I don’t need to be a genius to know
that a bar full of angry, violent Silvers is
the last place a Red girl wants to be. But
I can’t move. I can’t tear my eyes away
from Farley’s face.
     “You believe you are the masters of
the world, but your reign as kings and
gods is at an end. Until you recognize us
a s human, as equal, the fight will be at
your door. Not on a battlefield but in
your cities. In your streets. In your
homes. You don’t see us, and so we are
everywhere.” Her voice hums with
authority and poise. “And we will rise
up, Red as the dawn.”
     Red as the dawn.
     The footage ends, cutting back to the
slack-jawed blonde. Roars drown out
the rest of the broadcast as Silvers
around the bar find their voices. They
scream about Farley, calling her a
terrorist, a murderer, a Red devil.
Before their eyes can fall on me, I back
out into the street.
    But all down the avenue, from the
square to the Hall, Silvers boil out from
every bar and café. I try to rip off the red
band around my wrist, but the stupid
thing holds firm. Other Reds disappear
into alleys and doorways, trying to flee,
and I’m smart enough to follow. By the
time I find an alleyway, the screaming
starts.
    Against every instinct, I look over
my shoulder to see a Red man being held
up by the neck. He pleads with his
Silver assailant, begging. “Please, I
don’t know, I don’t know who the hell
those people are!”
    “What is the Scarlet Guard?” the
Silver yells into his face. I recognize
him as one of the nymphs who was
playing with children not half an hour
ago. “Who are they?”
    Before the Red can answer, a spray
of water pounds against him, stronger
than falling hammers. The nymph raises
a hand and the water rises up, splashing
him again. Silvers surround the scene,
jeering with glee, cheering him on. The
Red sputters and gasps, trying to catch
his breath. He proclaims his innocence
with every spare second, but the water
keeps coming. The nymph, wide-eyed
with hate, shows no signs of stopping.
He pulls water from the fountains, from
every glass, raining it down again and
again.
    The nymph is drowning him.
The blue awning is my beacon, guiding
me through the panicked streets as I
dodge Reds and Silvers alike. Usually
chaos is my best friend, making my work
as a thief that much easier. No one
notices a missing coin purse when
they’re running from a mob. But Kilorn
and two thousand crowns are no longer
my top priority. I can only think about
getting to Gisa and getting out of the city
that will certainly become a prison. If
they close the gates . . . I don’t want to
think about being stuck here, trapped
behind glass with freedom just out of
reach.
    Officers run back and forth in the
street—they don’t know what to do or
who to protect. A few round up Reds,
forcing them to their knees. They shiver
and beg, repeating over and over that
they don’t know anything. I’m willing to
bet I’m the only one in the entire city
who had even heard of the Scarlet
Guard before today.
     That sends a new stab of fear through
me. If I’m captured, if I tell them what
little I know—what will they do to my
family? To Kilorn? To the Stilts?
     They cannot catch me.
     Using the stalls to hide, I run as fast
as I can. The main street is a war zone,
but I keep my eyes forward, on the blue
awning beyond the square. I pass the
jewelry store and slow. Just one piece
could save Kilorn. But in the heartbeat it
takes me to stop, a hail of glass scrapes
my face. In the street, a telky has his eyes
on me and takes aim again. I don’t give
him the chance and take off, sliding
under     curtains and stalls and
outstretched arms until I get back to the
square. Before I know it, water sloshes
around my feet as I sprint through the
fountain.
    A frothing blue wave knocks me
sideways, into the churning water. It’s
not deep, no more than two feet to the
bottom, but the water feels like lead. I
can’t move, I can’t swim, I can’t
breathe. I can barely think. My mind can
only scream nymph, and I remember the
poor Red man on the avenue, drowning
on his own two feet. My head smacks the
stone bottom and I see stars, sparks,
before my vision clears. Every inch of
my skin feels electrified. The water
shifts around me, normal again, and I
break the surface of the fountain. Air
screams back into my lungs, searing my
throat and nose, but I don’t care. I’m
alive.
    Small, strong hands grab me by the
collar, trying to pull me from the
fountain. Gisa. My feet push off the
bottom and we tumble to the ground
together.
    “We have to go,” I yell, scrambling
to my feet.
    Gisa is already running ahead of me,
toward the Garden Door. “Very
perceptive of you!” she screams over
her shoulder.
    I can’t help but look back at the
square as I follow her. The Silver mob
pours in, searching through the stalls
with the voracity of wolves. The few
Reds left behind cower on the ground,
begging for mercy. And in the fountain I
just escaped from, a man with orange
hair floats facedown.
    My body trembles, every nerve on
fire as we push toward the gate. Gisa
holds my hand, pulling us both through
the crowd.
    “Ten miles to home,” Gisa murmurs.
“Did you get what you needed?”
    The weight of my shame comes
crashing down as I shake my head. There
was no time. I could barely get down the
avenue before the report came through.
There was nothing I could do.
    Gisa’s face falls, folding into a tiny
frown. “We’ll figure out something,” she
says, her voice just as desperate as I
feel.
    But the gate looms ahead, growing
closer with every passing second. It fills
me with dread. Once I pass through,
once I leave, Kilorn will really be gone.
    And I think that’s why she does it.
    Before I can stop her, grab her, or
pull her away, Gisa’s clever little hand
slips into someone’s bag. Not just any
someone though, but an escaping Silver.
A Silver with lead eyes, a hard nose,
and square-set shoulders that scream
“don’t mess with me.” Gisa might be an
artist with a needle and thread, but she’s
no pickpocket. It takes all of a second
for him to realize what’s happening. And
then someone grabs Gisa off the ground.
    It’s the same Silver. There are two
of them. Twins?
    “Not a wise time to start picking
Silver pockets,” the twins say in unison.
And then there are three of them, four,
five, six, surrounding us in the crowd.
Multiplying. He’s a cloner.
    They make my head spin. “She didn’t
mean any harm, she’s just a stupid kid
—”
    “I’m just a stupid kid!” Gisa yells,
trying to kick the one holding her.
     They chuckle together in a horrifying
sound.
     I lunge at Gisa, trying to pry her
away, but one of them pushes me back to
the ground. The hard stone road knocks
the air from my lungs, and I gasp for
breath, watching helplessly as another
twin puts a foot on my stomach, holding
me down.
     “Please—,” I choke out, but no one’s
listening to me anymore. The whining in
my head intensifies as every camera
spins to look at us. I feel electrified
again, this time by fear for my sister.
     A Security officer, the one who let
us inside earlier this morning, strides
over, his gun in hand. “What’s all this?”
he growls, looking around at the
identical Silvers.
    One by one, they meld back together,
until only two remain: the one holding
Gisa and the one pinning me to the
ground.
    “She’s a thief,” one says, shaking my
sister. To her credit, she doesn’t scream.
    The officer recognizes her, his hard
face twitching into a frown for a split
second. “You know the law, girl.”
    Gisa lowers her head. “I know the
law.”
    I struggle as much as I can, trying to
stop what’s coming. Glass shatters as a
nearby screen cracks and flashes, broken
by the riot. It does nothing to stop the
officer as he grabs my sister, pushing her
to the ground.
     My own voice screams out, joining
the din of the chaos. “It was me! It was
my idea! Hurt me!” But they don’t listen.
They don’t care.
     I can only watch as the officer lays
my sister next to me. Her eyes are on
mine as he brings the butt of his gun
down, shattering the bones in her sewing
hand.
                 FIVE

Kilorn will find me anywhere I try to
hide, so I keep moving. I sprint like I can
outrun what I’ve done to Gisa, how I’ve
failed Kilorn, how I’ve destroyed
everything. But even I can’t outrun the
look in my mother’s eyes when I brought
Gisa to the door. I saw the hopeless
shadow cross her face, and I ran before
my father wheeled himself into view. I
couldn’t face them both. I’m a coward.
    So I run until I can’t think, until
every bad memory fades away, until I
can only feel the burning in my muscles.
I even tell myself the tears on my cheeks
are rain.
     When I finally slow to catch my
breath, I’m outside the village, a few
miles down that terrible northern road.
Lights filter through the trees around the
bend, illuminating an inn, one of the
many on the old roads. It’s crowded like
it is every summer, full of servants and
seasonal workers who follow the royal
court. They don’t live in the Stilts, they
don’t know my face, so they’re easy prey
for pickpocketing. I do it every summer,
but Kilorn is always with me, smiling
into a drink as he watches me work. I
don’t suppose I’ll see his smile for
much longer.
     A bellow of laughter rises as a few
men stumble from the inn, drunk and
happy. Their coin purses jingle, heavy
with the day’s pay. Silver money, for
serving, smiling, and bowing to monsters
dressed as lords.
     I caused so much harm today, so
much hurt to the ones I love most. I
should turn around and go home, to face
everyone with at least some courage. But
instead I settle against the shadows of
the inn, content to remain in darkness.
     I guess causing pain is all I’m good
for.
     It doesn’t take long to fill the pockets
of my coat. The drunks filter out every
few minutes and I press against them,
pasting on a smile to hide my hands. No
one notices, no one even cares, when I
fade away again. I’m a shadow, and no
one remembers shadows.
    Midnight comes and goes and still I
stand, waiting. The moon overhead is a
bright reminder of the time, of how long
I’ve been gone. One last pocket, I tell
myself. One more and I’ll go. I’ve been
saying it for the past hour.
    I don’t think when the next patron
comes out. His eyes are on the sky, and
he doesn’t notice me. It’s too easy to
reach out, too easy to hook a finger
around the strings of his coin purse. I
should know better by now that nothing
here is easy, but the riot and Gisa’s
hollow eyes have made me foolish with
grief.
    His hand closes around my wrist, his
grip firm and strangely hot as he pulls
me forward out of the shadows. I try to
resist, to slip away and run, but he’s too
strong. When he spins, the fire in his
eyes puts a fear in me, the same fear I
felt this morning. But I welcome any
punishment he might summon. I deserve
it all.
     “Thief,” he says, a strange surprise
in his voice.
     I blink at him, fighting the urge to
laugh. I don’t even have the strength to
protest. “Obviously.”
     He stares at me, scrutinizing
everything from my face to my worn
boots. It makes me squirm. After a long
moment, he heaves a breath and lets me
go. Stunned, I can only stare at him.
When a silver coin spins through the air,
I barely have the wits to catch it. A
tetrarch. A silver tetrarch worth one
whole crown. Far more than any of the
stolen pennies in my pockets.
    “That should be more than enough to
tide you over,” he says before I can
respond. In the light of the inn, his eyes
glint red-gold, the color of warmth. My
years spent sizing people up do not fail
me, even now. His black hair is too
glossy, his skin too pale to be anything
but a servant. But his physique seems
more like a woodcutter’s, with broad
shoulders and strong legs. He’s young
too, a little older than me, though not
nearly as assured of himself as any
nineteen- or twenty-year-old should be.
    I should kiss his boots for letting me
g o and giving me such a gift, but my
curiosity gets the better of me. It always
does.
    “Why?” The word comes out hard
and harsh. After a day like today, how
can I be anything else?
    The question takes him aback and he
shrugs. “You need it more than I do.”
    I want to throw the coin back in his
face, to tell him I can take care of
myself, but part of me knows better. Has
today taught you nothing? “Thank you,”
I force out through gritted teeth.
    Somehow, he laughs at my reluctant
gratitude. “Don’t hurt yourself.” Then he
shifts, taking a step closer. He is the
strangest person I’ve ever met. “You
live in the village, don’t you?”
    “Yes,” I reply, gesturing to myself.
With my faded hair, dirty clothes, and
defeated eyes, what else could I be? He
stands in stark contrast, his shirt fine and
clean, and his shoes are soft, reflective
leather. He shifts under my gaze, playing
with his collar. I make him nervous.
    He pales in the moonlight, his eyes
darting. “Do you enjoy it?” he asks,
deflecting. “Living there?”
    His question almost makes me laugh,
but he doesn’t look amused. “Does
anyone?” I finally respond, wondering
what on earth he’s playing at.
    But instead of retorting swiftly,
snapping back like Kilorn would, he
falls silent. A dark look crosses his face.
“Are you heading back?” he says
suddenly, gesturing down the road.
    “Why, scared of the dark?” I drawl,
folding my arms across my chest. But in
the pit of my stomach, I wonder if I
should be afraid. He’s strong, he’s fast,
and you’re all alone out here.
    His smile returns, and the comfort it
gives me is unsettling. “No, but I want to
make sure you keep your hands to
yourself for the rest of the night. Can’t
have you driving half the bar out of
house and home, can we? I’m Cal, by the
way,” he adds, stretching out a hand to
shake.
     I don’t take it, remembering the
blazing heat of his skin. Instead, I set off
down the road, my steps quick and quiet.
“Mare Barrow,” I tell him over my
shoulder, and it doesn’t take much for
his long legs to catch up.
     “So are you always this pleasant?”
he prods, and for some reason, I feel
very much like I’m being examined. But
the cold silver in my hand keeps me
calm, reminding me of what else he has
in his pockets. Silver for Farley. How
fitting.
     “The lords must pay well for you to
carry whole crowns,” I retort, hoping to
scare him off the topic. It works
beautifully and he retreats.
    “I have a good job,” he explains,
trying to brush it off.
    “That makes one of us.”
    “But you’re—”
    “Seventeen,” I finish for him. “I still
have some time before conscription.”
    He narrows his eyes, lips twisting
into a grim line. Something hard creeps
into his voice, sharpening his words.
“How much time?”
    “Less every day.” Just saying it
aloud makes my insides ache. And
Kilorn has even less than me.
    His words die away and he’s staring
again, surveying me as we walk through
the woods. Thinking. “And there are no
jobs,” he mutters, more to himself than
me. “No way for you to avoid
conscription.”
    His confusion puzzles me. “Maybe
things are different where you’re from.”
    “So you steal.”
    I steal. “It’s the best I can do,” falls
from my lips. Again, I remember that
causing pain is all I’m good for. “My
sister has a job though.” It slips out
before I remember—No she doesn’t.
Not anymore. Because of you.
    Cal watches me battle with the
words, wondering whether or not to
correct myself. It’s all I can do to keep
my face straight, to keep from breaking
down entirely in front of a complete
stranger. But he must see what I’m trying
to hide. “Were you at the Hall today?” I
think he already knows the answer. “The
riots were terrible.”
    “They were.” I almost choke on the
words.
    “Did you . . . ,” he presses in the
quietest, calmest way. It’s like poking a
hole in a dam, and it all comes spilling
out. I couldn’t stop the words even if I
wanted to.
    I don’t mention Farley or the Scarlet
Guard or even Kilorn. Just that my sister
slipped me into Grand Garden, to help
me steal the money we needed to
survive. Then came Gisa’s mistake, her
injury, what it meant to us. What I’ve
done to my family. What I have been
doing, disappointing my mother,
embarrassing my father, stealing from
the people I call my community. Here on
the road with nothing but darkness
around me, I tell a stranger how terrible
I am. He doesn’t ask questions, even
when I don’t make sense. He just listens.
    “It’s the best I can do,” I say again
before my voice gives out entirely.
    Then silver shines in the corner of
my eye. He’s holding up another coin. In
the moonlight, I can just see the outline
of the king’s flaming crown stamped into
the metal. When he presses it into my
hand, I expect to feel his heat again, but
he’s gone cold.
    I don’t want your pity , I feel like
screaming, but that would be foolish.
The coin will buy what Gisa no longer
can.
    “I’m truly sorry for you, Mare.
Things shouldn’t be like this.”
    I can’t even summon the strength to
frown. “There are worse lives to live.
Don’t feel sorry for me.”

He leaves me at the edge of the village,
letting me walk through the stilt houses
alone. Something about the mud and
shadows makes Cal uncomfortable, and
he disappears before I get a chance to
look back and thank the strange servant.
     My home is quiet and dark, but even
so, I shudder in fear. The morning seems
a hundred years away, part of another
life where I was stupid and selfish and
maybe even a little bit happy. Now I
have nothing but a conscripted friend
and a sister’s broken bones.
     “You shouldn’t worry your mother
like that,” my father’s voice rumbles at
me from behind one of the stilt poles. I
haven’t seen him on the ground in more
years than I care to remember.
     My voice squeaks in surprise and
fear. “Dad? What are you doing? How
did you—?” But he jabs a thumb over
his shoulder, to the pulley rig dangling
from the house. For the first time, he
used it.
     “Power went out. Thought I’d give it
a look,” he says, gruff as ever. He
wheels past me, stopping in front of the
utility box piped into the ground. Every
house has one, regulating the electric
charge that keeps the lights on.
    Dad wheezes to himself, his chest
clicking with each breath. Maybe Gisa
will be like him now, her hand a
metallic mess, her brain torn and bitter
with the thought of what could have
been.
    “Why don’t you just use the ’lec
papers I get you?”
    In response, Dad pulls a ration paper
from his shirt and feeds it into the box.
Normally, the thing would spark to life,
but nothing happens. Broken.
    “No use,” Dad sighs, sitting back in
his chair. We both stare at the utility
box, at a loss for words, not wanting to
move, not wanting to go back upstairs.
Dad ran just like I did, unable to stay in
the house, where Mom was surely crying
over Gisa, weeping for lost dreams,
while my sister tried not to join her.
    He bats the box like hitting the damn
thing can suddenly bring light and
warmth and hope back to us. His actions
become more harried, more desperate,
and anger radiates from him. Not at me
or Gisa but the world. Long ago he
called us ants, Red ants burning in the
light of a Silver sun. Destroyed by the
greatness of others, losing the battle for
our right to exist because we are not
special. We did not evolve like them,
with powers and strengths beyond our
limited imaginations. We stayed the
same, stagnant in our own bodies. The
world changed around us and we
stayed the same.
    Then the anger is in me too, cursing
Farley, Kilorn, conscription, every little
thing I can think of. The metal box is
cool to the touch, having long lost the
heat of electricity. But there are
vibrations still, deep in the mechanism,
waiting to be switched back on. I lose
myself in trying to find the electricity, to
bring it back and prove that even one
small thing can go right in a world so
wrong. Something sharp meets my
fingertips, making my body jolt. An
exposed wire or faulty switch, I tell
myself. It feels like a pinprick, like a
needle spiking in my nerves, but the pain
never follows.
     Above us, the porch light hums to
life.
     “Well, fancy that,” Dad mutters.
     He spins in the mud, wheeling
himself back to the pulley. I follow
quietly, not wanting to bring up the
reason we are both so afraid of the place
we call home.
     “No more running,” he breathes,
buckling himself into the rig.
     “No more running,” I agree, more for
myself than him.
     The rig whines with the strain,
hoisting him up to the porch. I’m quicker
on the ladder, so I wait for him at the
top, then wordlessly help detach him
from the rig. “Bugger of a thing,” Dad
grumbles when we finally unsnap the
last buckle.
     “Mom will be happy you’re getting
out of the house.”
     He looks up at me sharply, grabbing
my hand. Though Dad barely works
now, repairing trinkets and whittling for
kids, his hands are still rough and
callused, like he just returned from the
front lines. The war never leaves.
     “Don’t tell your mother.”
     “But—”
     “I know it seems like nothing, but
it’s enough of something. She’ll think it’s
a small step on a big journey, you see?
First I leave the house at night, then
during the day, then I’m rolling around
the market with her like it’s twenty years
ago. Then things go back to the way they
were.” His eyes darken as he speaks,
fighting to keep his voice low and level.
“I’m never getting better, Mare. I’m
never going to feel better. I can’t let her
hope for that, not when I know it’ll never
happen. Do you understand?”
     All too well, Dad.
     He knows what hope has done to me
and softens. “I wish things were
different.”
     “We all do.”
     Despite the shadows, I can see
Gisa’s broken hand when I get up to the
loft. Normally she sleeps in a ball,
curled up under a thin blanket, but now
she lies on her back, with her injury
elevated on a pile of clothes. Mom reset
her splint, improving my meager attempt
to help, and the bandages are fresh. I
don’t need light to know her poor hand
is black with bruises. She sleeps
restlessly, her body tossing, but her arm
stays still. Even in sleep, it hurts her.
     I want to reach out to her, but how
can I make up for the terrible events of
the day?
     I pull out Shade’s letter from the
little box where I keep all his
correspondences. If nothing else, this
will calm me down. His jokes, his
words, his voice trapped in the page
always soothe me. But as I scan the
letter again, a sense of dread pools in my
stomach.
    “Red as the dawn . . .” the letter
reads. There it is, plain as the nose on
my face. Farley’s words from her video,
the Scarlet Guard’s rallying cry, in my
brother’s handwriting. The phrase is too
strange to ignore, too unique to brush off.
And the next sentence, “see the sun rise
stronger . . .” My brother is smart but
practical. He doesn’t care about sunrises
or dawns or witty turns of phrase. Rise
echoes in me, but instead of Farley’s
voice in my head, it’s my brother
speaking. Rise, red as the dawn.
    Somehow, Shade knew. Many weeks
ago, before the bombing, before Farley’s
broadcast, Shade knew about the Scarlet
Guard and tried to tell us. Why?
Because he’s one of them.
                 SIX

When the door bangs open at dawn, I’m
not frightened. Security searches are
normal, though we usually only get one
or two a year. This will be the third.
    “C’mon, Gee,” I mutter, helping her
out of her cot and down the ladder. She
moves precariously, leaning on her good
arm, and Mom waits for us on the floor.
Her arms close around Gisa, but her
eyes are on me. To my surprise, she
doesn’t look angry or even disappointed
with me. Instead, her gaze is soft.
    Two officers wait by the door, their
guns hanging by their sides. I recognize
them from the village outpost, but there’s
another figure, a young woman in red
with a triple-colored crown badge over
her heart. A royal servant, a Red who
serves the king, I realize, and I begin to
understand. This is not a usual search.
    “We submit to search and seizure,”
my father grumbles, speaking the words
he must every time this happens. But
instead of splitting off to paw through
our house, the Security officers stand
firm.
    The young woman steps forward
and, to my horror, addresses me. “Mare
Barrow, you have been summoned to
Summerton.”
    Gisa’s good hand closes around
mine, like she can hold me back. “W-
What?” I manage to stammer.
     “You have been summoned to
Summerton,” she repeats, and gestures to
the door. “We will escort you. Please
proceed.”
     A summons. For a Red. Never in my
life have I heard of such a thing. So why
me? What have I done to deserve this?
     On second thought, I’m a criminal
and probably considered a terrorist due
to my association with Farley. My body
prickles with nerves, every muscle taut
and ready. I’ll have to run, even though
the officers block the door. It’ll be a
miracle if I make it to a window.
     “Calm down, everything’s settled
after yesterday.” She chuckles, mistaking
my fear. “The Hall and the market are
well controlled now. Please proceed.”
To my surprise, she smiles, even as the
Security officers clench their guns. It
puts a chill in my blood.
    To refuse Security, to refuse a royal
summons, would mean death—and not
just for me. “Okay,” I mumble,
untangling my hand from Gisa’s. She
moves to grab on to me, but our mother
pulls her back. “I’ll see you later?”
    The question hangs in the air, and I
feel Dad’s warm hand brush my arm.
He’s saying good-bye . Mom’s eyes
swim with unshed tears, and Gisa’s
trying not to blink, to remember every
last second of me. I don’t even have
something I can leave her. But before I
can linger or let myself cry, an officer
takes me by the arm and pulls me away.
     The words force themselves past my
lips, though they come out as barely
more than a whisper. “I love you.”
     And then the door slams behind me,
shutting me out of my home and my life.
     They hasten me through the village,
down the road to the market square. We
pass by Kilorn’s run-down house.
Usually he’s awake by now, halfway to
the river to start the day early when it’s
still cool, but those days are gone. Now
I bet he sleeps through half the day,
enjoying what little comforts he can
before conscription. Part of me wants to
yell good-bye to him, but I don’t. He’ll
come sniffing around for me later, and
Gisa will tell him everything. With a
silent laugh I remember that Farley will
be expecting me today, with a fortune in
payment. She’ll be disappointed.
    In the square, a gleaming black
transport waits for us. Four wheels,
glass windows, rounded to the ground—
it looks like a beast ready to consume
me. Another officer sits at the controls
and guns the engine when we approach,
spitting black smoke into the early-
morning air. I’m forced into the back
without a word, and the servant barely
slides in next to me before the transport
takes off, racing down the road at speeds
I had never even imagined. This will be
my first—and last—time riding in one.
    I want to speak, to ask what’s going
on, how they’re going to punish me for
my crimes, but I know my words will
fall on deaf ears. So I stare out the
window, watching the village disappear
as we enter the forest, racing down the
familiar northern road. It’s not so
crowded as yesterday, and Security
officers dot the way. The Hall is
controlled, the servant had said. I
suppose this is what she meant.
    The diamondglass wall shines
ahead, reflecting the sun as it rises from
the woods. I want to squint, but I keep
myself still. I must keep my eyes open
here.
    The gate crawls with black uniforms,
all Security officers checking and
rechecking travelers as they enter. When
we coast to a stop, the serving woman
pulls me out of the transport and past the
line and through the gate. No one
protests, or even bothers to check for
IDs. She must be familiar here.
    Once we’re inside, she glances back
at me. “I’m Ann, by the way, but we
mostly go by last names. Call me
Walsh.”
    Walsh. The name sounds familiar.
Paired with her faded hair and tanned
skin, it can mean only one thing. “You’re
from . . . ?”
    “The Stilts, same as you. I knew your
brother Tramy, and I wish I didn’t know
Bree. A real heartbreaker, that one.”
Bree had a reputation around the village
before he left. He told me once that he
didn’t fear conscription as much as
everyone else because the dozen
bloodthirsty girls he was leaving behind
were far more dangerous. “I don’t know
you though. But I certainly will.”
    I can’t help but bristle. “What’s that
supposed to mean?”
    “I mean you’re going to be working
long hours here. I don’t know who hired
you or what they told you about the job,
but it starts to wear on you. It’s not all
changing bedsheets and cleaning plates.
You have to look without seeing, hear
without listening. We’re objects up
there, living statues meant to serve.” She
sighs to herself and turns, wrenching
open a door built right into the side of
the gate. “Especially now, with this
Scarlet Guard business. It’s never a
good time to be a Red, but this is very
bad.”
     She steps through the door,
seemingly into the solid wall. It takes me
a moment to realize she’s going down a
flight of stairs, disappearing into
semidarkness.
     “The job?” I press. “What job? What
is this?”
     She turns on the stairs, all but rolling
her eyes at me. “You’ve been summoned
to fill a serving post,” she says like it’s
the most obvious thing in the world.
     Working. A job . I almost fall over at
the thought.
    Cal. He said he had a good job—and
now he’s pulled some strings to do the
same for me. I might even be working
with him. My heart leaps at the prospect,
knowing what this means. I’m not going
to die, I’m not even going to fight. I’m
going to work and I’m going to live.
And later, when I find Cal, I can
convince him to do the same for Kilorn.
    “Keep up, I don’t have time to hold
your hand!”
    Scrambling after her, I descend into
a surprisingly dark tunnel. Small lights
glow on the walls, making it just
possible to see. Pipes run overhead,
humming with running water and
electricity.
    “Where are we going?” I finally
breathe.
    I can almost hear Walsh’s dismay as
she turns to me, confused. “The Hall of
the Sun, of course.”
    For a second, I think I can feel my
heart stop. “Wha-what? The palace, the
actual palace?”
    She taps the badge on her uniform.
The crown winks in the low light.
    “You serve the king now.”

They have a uniform ready for me, but I
barely notice it. I’m too amazed by my
surroundings, the tan stone and glittering
mosaic floor of this forgotten hall in the
house of a king. Other servants bustle
past in a parade of red uniforms. I search
their faces, looking for Cal, wanting to
thank him, but he never appears.
    Walsh stays by me, whispering
advice. “Say nothing. Hear nothing.
Speak to no one, for they will not speak
to you.”
    I can hardly keep the words straight;
the last two days have been a ruin on my
heart and soul. I think life has simply
decided to open the floodgates, trying to
drown me in a whirlwind of twists and
turns.
    “You came on a busy day, perhaps
the worst we will ever see.”
    “I saw the boats and airships—
Silvers have been going upriver for
weeks,” I say. “More than usual, even
for this time of year.”
    Walsh hurries me along, pushing a
tray of glittering cups into my hands.
Surely these things can buy my freedom
and Kilorn’s, but the Hall is guarded at
every door and window. I could never
slip by so many officers, even with all
my skills.
    “What’s happening today?” I dumbly
ask. A lock of my dark hair falls in my
eyes, and before I can try to swish it
away, Walsh pushes the hair back and
fastens it with a tiny pin, her motions
quick and precise. “Is that a stupid
question?”
    “No, I didn’t know about it either,
not until we started preparing. After all,
they haven’t had one for twenty years,
since Queen Elara was selected.” She
speaks so fast her words almost blur
together. “Today is Queenstrial. The
daughters of the High Houses, the great
Silver families, have all come to offer
themselves to the prince. There’s a big
feast tonight, but now they’re in the
Spiral Garden, preparing to present,
hoping to be chosen. One of those girls
gets to be the next queen, and they’re
slapping each other silly for the chance.”
    An image of a bunch of peacocks
flashes in my head. “So, what, they do a
spin, say a few words, bat their
eyelashes?”
    But Walsh snorts at me, shaking her
head. “Hardly.” Then her eyes glitter.
“You’re on serving duty, so you’ll get to
see for yourself.”
    The doors loom ahead, made of
carved wood and flowing glass. A
servant props them open, allowing the
line of red uniforms to move through.
And then it’s my turn.
    “Aren’t you coming?” I can hear the
desperation in my voice, almost begging
Walsh to stay with me. But she backs
away, leaving me alone. Before I can
hold up the line or otherwise ruin the
organized assembly of servants, I force
myself forward and out into the sunlight
of what she called the Spiral Garden.
    At first I think I’m in the middle of
another arena like the one back home.
The space curves downward into an
immense bowl, but instead of stone
benches, tables and plush chairs crowd
the spiral of terraces. Plants and
fountains trickle down the steps,
dividing the terraces into boxes. They
join at the bottom, decorating a grassy
circle ringed with stone statues. Ahead
of me is a boxed area dripping with red
and black silk. Four seats, each one
made of unforgiving iron, look down on
the floor.
    What in hell is this place?
    My work goes by in a blur,
following the lead of the other Reds. I’m
a kitchen server, meant to clean, aid the
cooks, and currently, prepare the arena
for the upcoming event. Why the royals
need an arena, I’m not sure. Back home
they are only used for Feats, to watch
Silver against Silver, but what could it
mean here? This is a palace. Blood will
never stain these floors. Yet the not-
arena fills me with a dreadful feeling of
foreboding. The prickling sensation
returns, pulsing under my skin in waves.
By the time I finish and return to the
servant entrance, Queenstrial is about to
begin.
    The other servants make themselves
scarce, moving to an elevated platform
surrounded by sheer curtains. I scramble
after them and bump into line, just as
another set of doors opens, directly
between the royal box and the servants’
entrance.
    It’s starting.
    My mind flashes back to Grand
Garden, to the beautiful, cruel creatures
calling themselves human. All flashy and
vain, with hard eyes and worse tempers.
These Silvers, the High Houses, as
Walsh calls them, will be no different.
They might even be worse.
    They enter as a crowd, in a flock of
colors that splits around the Spiral
Garden with cold grace. The different
families, or houses, are easy to spot;
they all wear the same colors as each
other. Purple, green, black, yellow, a
rainbow of shades moving toward their
family boxes. I quickly lose count of
them all. Just how many houses are
there? More and more join the crowd,
some stopping to talk, others embracing
with stiff arms. This is a party for them,
I realize. Most probably have little hope
to put forth a queen and this is just a
vacation.
    But a few don’t look to be in the
celebrating mood. A silver-haired
family in black silk sits in focused
silence to the right of the king’s box. The
patriarch of the house has a pointed
beard and black eyes. Farther down, a
house of navy blue and white mutter
together. To my surprise, I recognize one
of them. Samson Merandus, the whisper
I saw in the arena a few days ago.
Unlike the others, he stares darkly at the
floor, his attention elsewhere. I make a
note to myself not to run into him or his
deadly abilities.
    Strangely, though, I don’t see any
girls of age to marry a prince. Perhaps
they’re preparing elsewhere, eagerly
awaiting their chance to win a crown.
    Occasionally, someone presses a
square metal button on their table to flick
on a light, indicating they require a
servant. Whoever’s closest to the door
attends to them, and the rest of us shuffle
along, waiting for our turn to serve. Of
course, the second I move next to the
door, the wretched black-eyed patriarch
slaps the button on his table.
    Thank heavens for my feet, which
have never failed me. I nearly skip
through the crowd, dancing between
roving bodies as my heart hammers in
my chest. Instead of stealing from these
people, I mean to serve them. The Mare
Barrow of last week wouldn’t know
whether to laugh or cry at this version of
herself. But she was a foolish girl, and
now I pay the price.
    “Sir?” I say, facing the patriarch
who had called for service. In my head, I
curse at myself. Say nothing is the first
rule, and I have already broken it.
    But he doesn’t seem to notice and
simply holds up his empty water glass, a
bored look on his face. “They’re toying
with us, Ptolemus,” he grumbles to the
muscled young man next to him. I assume
he is the one unfortunate enough to be
called Ptolemus.
    “A demonstration of power, Father,”
Ptolemus replies, draining his own
glass. He holds it out to me, and I take it
without hesitation. “They make us wait
because they can.”
    They are the royals who have yet to
make an appearance. But to hear these
Silvers discuss them so, with such
disdain, is perplexing. We Reds insult
the king and the nobles if we can get
away with it, but I think that’s our
prerogative. These people have never
suffered a day in their lives. What
problems could they possibly have with
each other?
    I want to stay and listen, but even I
know that’s against the rules. I turn
around, climbing a flight of steps out of
their box. There’s a sink hidden behind
some brightly colored flowers, probably
so I don’t have to go all the way back
around the not-arena to refill their
drinks. That’s when a metallic, sharp
tone reverberates through the space,
much like the one at the beginning of the
First Friday Feats. It chirps a few times,
sounding out a proud melody, heralding
what must be the entrance of the king.
All around, the High Houses rise to their
feet, begrudgingly or not. I notice
Ptolemus mutter something to his father
again.
    From my vantage point, hidden
behind the flowers, I’m level with the
king’s box and slightly behind it. Mare
Barrow, a few yards from the king. What
would my family think, or Kilorn for that
matter? This man sends us to die, and
I’ve willingly become his servant. It
makes me sick.
     He enters briskly, shoulders set and
straight. Even from behind, he’s much
fatter than he looks on the coins and
broadcasts, but also taller. His uniform
is black and red, with a military cut,
though I doubt he’s ever spent a single
day in the trenches Reds die in. Badges
and medals glitter on his breast, a
testament to things he’s never done. He
even wears a gilded sword despite the
many guards around him. The crown on
his head is familiar, made of twisted red
gold and black iron, each point a burst of
curling flame. It seems to burn against
his inky black hair flecked with gray.
How fitting, for the king is a burner, as
was his father, and his father before him,
and so on. Destructive, powerful
controllers of heat and fire. Once, our
kings used to burn dissenters with
nothing more than a flaming touch. This
king might not burn Reds anymore, but
he still kills us with war and ruin. His
name is one I’ve known since I was a
little girl sitting in the schoolroom, still
eager to learn, as if it could get me
somewhere. Tiberias Calore the Sixth,
King of Norta, Flame of the North. A
mouthful if there ever was one. I would
spit on his name if I could.
     The queen follows him, nodding at
the crowd. Whereas the king’s clothes
are dark and severely cut, her navy and
white garb is airy and light. She bows
only to Samson’s house, and I realize
she’s wearing the same colors as them.
She must be their kin, judging by the
family resemblance. Same ash-blond
hair, blue eyes, and pointed smile,
making her look like a wild, predatory
cat.
     As intimidating as the royals seem,
they’re nothing compared to the guards
who follow them. Even though I’m a Red
born in mud, I know who they are.
Everyone knows what a Sentinel looks
like, because no one wants to meet them.
They flank the king in every broadcast,
at every speech or decree. As always,
their uniforms look like flame, flickering
between red and orange, and their eyes
glitter behind fearsome black masks.
Each one carries a black rifle tipped
with a gleaming silver bayonet that
could cut bone. Their skills are even
more frightening than their appearances
—elite warriors from different Silver
houses, trained from childhood, sworn to
the king and his family for their entire
lives. They’re enough to make me
shiver. But the High Houses aren’t afraid
at all.
     Somewhere deep in the boxes, the
yelling starts. “Death to the Scarlet
Guard!” someone shouts, and others
quickly chime in. A chill goes through
me as I remember the events of
yesterday, now so far away. How
quickly this crowd could turn. . . .
    The king looks ruffled, paling at the
noise. He’s not used to outbursts like
this and almost snarls at the shouts.
    “The Scarlet Guard—and all our
enemies—are being dealt with!”
Tiberias rumbles, his voice echoing out
among the crowd. It silences them like
the crack of a whip. “But that is not what
we are here to address. Today we honor
tradition, and no Red devil will impede
that. Now is the rite of Queenstrial, to
bring forth the most talented daughter to
wed the most noble son. In this we find
strength, to bind the High Houses, and
power, to ensure Silver rule until the end
of days, to defeat our enemies, on the
borders, and within them.”
    “Strength,” the crowd rumbles back
at him. It’s frightening. “Power.”
    “The time has come again to uphold
this ideal, and both my sons honor our
most solemn custom.” He waves a hand,
and two figures step forward, flanking
their father. I cannot see their faces, but
both are tall and black-haired, like the
king. They too wear military uniforms.
“The Prince Maven, of House Calore
and Merandus, son of my royal wife, the
Queen Elara.”
    The second prince, paler and slighter
than the other, raises a hand in stern
greeting. He turns left and right, and I
catch a glimpse of his face. Though he
has a regal, serious look to him, he can’t
be more than seventeen. Sharp-featured
and blue-eyed, he could freeze fire with
his smile—he despises this pageantry. I
have to agree with him.
    “And the crown prince of House
Calore and Jacos, son of my late wife,
the Queen Coriane, heir to the Kingdom
of Norta and the Burning Crown,
Tiberias the Seventh.”
    I’m too busy laughing at the sheer
absurdity of the name to notice the young
man waving and smiling. Finally I raise
my eyes, just to say I was this close to
the future king. But I get much more than
I bargained for.
    The glass goblets in my hands drop,
landing harmlessly in the sink of water.
    I know that smile, and I know those
eyes. They burned into mine only last
night. He got me this job; he saved me
from conscription. He was one of us.
How can this be?
    And then he turns fully, waving all
around. There’s no mistaking it.
    The crown prince is Cal.
               SEVEN

I return to the servants’ platform, a
hollow feeling in my stomach. Whatever
happiness I felt before is completely
gone. I can’t bring myself to look back,
to see him standing there in fine clothes,
dripping with ribbons and medals and
the royal airs I hate. Like Walsh, he
bears the badge of the flaming crown,
but his is made of dark jet, diamond, and
ruby. It winks against the hard black of
his uniform. Gone are the drab clothes
he wore last night, used to blend in with
peasants like me. Now he looks every
inch a future king, Silver to the bone. To
think I trusted him.
    The other servants make way, letting
me shuffle to the back of the line while
my head spins. He got me this job, he
saved me, saved my family—and he is
one of them. Worse than one of them. A
prince. The prince. The person everyone
in this spiral stone monstrosity is here to
see.
    “All of you have come to honor my
son and the kingdom, and so I honor
you,” King Tiberias booms, breaking
apart my thoughts as if they were glass.
He raises his arms, gesturing to the many
boxes of people. Though I try my hardest
to keep my eyes on the king, I can’t help
but glance at Cal. He’s smiling, but it
doesn’t reach his eyes.
    “I honor your right to rule. The future
king, the son of my son, will be of your
silverblood, as he will be of mine. Who
will claim their right?”
    The silver-haired patriarch barks out
in response. “I claim Queenstrial!”
    All over the spiral, the leaders of the
different houses shout in unison. “I claim
Queenstrial!” they echo, upholding some
tradition I don’t understand.
    Tiberias smiles and nods. “Then it
has begun. Lord Provos, if you would.”
    The king turns on the spot, looking
toward what I assume is House Provos.
The rest of the spiral follow his gaze,
their eyes landing on a family dressed in
gold striped with black. An older man,
his gray hair shot with streaks of white,
steps forward. In his strange clothes he
looks like a wasp about to sting. When
he twitches his hand, I don’t know what
to expect.
    Suddenly, the platform lurches,
moving sideways. I can’t help but jump,
almost knocking into the servant next to
me, as we slide along an unseen track.
My heart rises in my throat as I watch
the rest of the Spiral Garden spin. Lord
Provos is a telky, moving the structure
along prebuilt tracks with nothing but the
power of his mind.
    The entire structure twists under his
command, until the garden floor widens
into a huge circle. The lower terraces
pull back, aligning with the upper levels,
and the spiral becomes a massive
cylinder open to the sky. As the terraces
move, the floor lowers, until it stops
nearly twenty feet below the lowest box.
The fountains turn into waterfalls,
spilling from the top of the cylinder to
the bottom, where they fill deep, narrow
pools. Our platform glides to a stop
above the king’s box, allowing us a
perfect view of everything, including the
floor far below. All this takes less than a
minute, with Lord Provos transforming
the Spiral Garden into something much
more sinister.
    But when Provos takes his seat
again, the change is still not done. The
hum of electricity rises until it crackles
all around, making the hairs on my arms
stand up. A purple-white light blazes
near the floor of the garden, sparking
with energy from tiny, unseen points in
the stone. No Silver stands up to
command it, like Provos did with an
arena. I realize why. This is not some
Silver’s doing but a wonder of
technology, of electricity. Lightning
without thunder. The beams of light
crisscross and intersect, weaving
themselves into a brilliant, blinding net.
Just looking at it hurts my eyes, sending
sharp daggers of pain through my head.
How the others can stand it, I have no
idea.
    The Silvers look impressed,
intrigued with something they can’t
control. As for us Reds, we gape in
complete awe.
    The net crystallizes as the electricity
expands and veins. And then, as
suddenly as it came, the noise stops. The
lightning freezes, solidifying in midair,
creating a clear, purple shield between
the floor and us. Between us and
whatever might appear down there.
    My mind runs wild, wondering what
could require a shield made of lightning.
Not a bear or a pack of wolves or any of
the rare beasts of the forest. Even the
creatures of myth, great cats or sea
sharks or dragons, would pose no harm
to the many Silvers above. And why
would there be beasts at Queenstrial?
This is supposed to be a ceremony to
choose queens, not fight monsters.
    As if answering me, the ground in the
circle of statues, now the small center of
the cylinder floor, opens wide. Without
thinking, I push forward, hoping to get a
better look with my own eyes. The rest
of the servants crowd with me, trying to
see what horrors this chamber can bring
forth.
    The smallest girl I’ve ever seen rises
out of darkness.
    Cheers rise as a house in brown silk
and red gemstones applauds their
daughter.
    “Rohr, of House Rhambos,” the
family shouts, announcing her to the
world.
    The girl, no more than fourteen,
smiles up at her family. She’s tiny in
comparison to the statues, but her hands
are strangely large. The rest of her looks
liable to blow away in a strong breeze.
She takes a turn about the ring of statues,
always smiling upward. Her gaze lands
on Cal—I mean the prince—trying to
entice him with her doe eyes or the
occasional flip of honey-blond hair. In
short, she looks foolish. Until she
approaches a solid stone statue and
sloughs its head off with a single, simple
slap.
    House Rhambos speaks again.
“Strongarm.”
    Below us, little Rohr destroys the
floor in a whirlwind, turning statues into
pulverized piles of dust while she cracks
the ground beneath her feet. She’s like an
earthquake in tiny human form, breaking
apart anything and everything in her way.
    So this is a pageant.
    A violent one, meant to showcase a
girl’s beauty, splendor—and strength.
The most talented daughter. This is a
display of power, to pair the prince with
the most powerful girl, so that their
children might be the strongest of all.
And this has been going on for hundreds
of years.
    I shudder to think of the strength in
Cal’s pinkie finger.
    He claps politely as the Rhambos
girl finishes her display of organized
destruction and steps back onto the
descending platform. House Rhambos
cheers for her as she disappears.
     Next comes Heron of House Welle,
the daughter of my own governor. She’s
tall, with a face like her bird namesake.
The destroyed earth shifts around her as
she puts the floor back together.
“Greenwarden,” her family chants. A
greeny. At her command, trees grow tall
in the blink of an eye, their tops scraping
against the lightning shield. It sparks
where the boughs touch, setting fire to
the fresh leaves. The next girl, a nymph
of House Osanos, rises to the occasion.
Using the waterfall fountains, she douses
the contained forest fire in a hurricane of
whitewater, leaving only charred trees
and scorched earth.
    This goes on for what feels like
hours. Each girl rises up to show her
worth, and each one finds a more
destroyed arena, but they’re trained to
deal with anything. They range in age
and appearance, but they are all
dazzling. One girl, barely twelve years
old, explodes everything she touches
like some kind of walking bomb.
“Oblivion,”      her     family      shouts,
describing her power. As she obliterates
the last of the white statues, the lightning
shield holds firm. It hisses against her
fire, and the noise shrieks in my ears.
    The electricity, the Silvers, and the
shouts blur in my head as I watch
nymphs and greenys, swifts, strongarms,
telkies, and what seems like a hundred
other kinds of Silver show off beneath
the shield. Things I never dreamed
possible happen before my eyes, as girls
turn their skin to stone or scream apart
walls of glass. The Silvers are greater
and stronger than I ever feared, with
powers I never even knew existed. How
can these people be real?
    I’ve come all this way and suddenly
I’m back in the arena, watching Silvers
display everything we are not.
    I want to marvel in awe as a
creature-controlling animos calls down
a thousand doves from the sky. When
birds dive headfirst into the lightning
shield, bursting in little clouds of blood,
feathers, and deadly electricity, my awe
turns to disgust. The shield sparks again,
burning up what’s left of the birds until it
shines like new. I almost retch at the
sound of applause when the cold-
blooded animos sinks back into the
floor.
    Another girl, hopefully the last, rises
into an arena now reduced to dust.
    “Evangeline, of House Samos,” yells
the patriarch of the silver-haired family.
He speaks alone, and his voice echoes
across the Spiral Garden.
    From my vantage point, I notice the
king and queen sit up a bit straighter.
Evangeline already has their attention. In
stark contrast, Cal looks down at his
hands.
    While the other girls wore silk
dresses and a few had strange, gilded
armor, Evangeline rises in an outfit of
black leather. Jacket, pants, boots, all
studded with hard silver. No, not silver.
Iron. Silver is not so dull or hard. Her
house cheers for her, all of them on their
feet. She belongs to Ptolemus and the
patriarch, but others cheer too, other
families. They want her to be queen. She
is the favorite. She salutes, two fingers
to her brow, first to her family and then
to the king’s box. They return the
gesture,    blatantly     favoring    this
Evangeline.
    Maybe this is more like the Feats
than I realized. Except instead of
showing the Reds where we stand, this
is the king showing his subjects,
powerful as they are, where they stand.
A hierarchy within the hierarchy.
     I’ve been so preoccupied with the
trials that I almost don’t notice when it’s
my turn to serve again. Before anyone
can nudge me in the right direction, I set
off to the right box, barely hearing the
Samos patriarch speak. “Magnetron,” I
think he says, but I have no idea what it
means.
     I move through the narrow corridors
that were once open walkways, down to
the Silvers requiring service. The box is
at the bottom, but I’m quick and take
almost no time getting down to them. I
find a particularly fat clan dressed in
garish yellow silk and awful feathers, all
enjoying a massive cake. Plates and
empty cups litter the box, and I get to
work cleaning them up, my hands quick
and practiced. A video screen blares
inside the box, displaying Evangeline,
who seems to be standing still down on
the floor.
    “What a farce this is,” one of the fat
yellow birds grumbles as he stuffs his
face. “The Samos girl has already won.”
    Strange. She seems to be the
weakest of all.
    I pile the plates but keep my eyes on
the screen, watching her prowl across
the wasted floor. It doesn’t seem like
there’s anything for her to work with, to
show what she can do, but she doesn’t
seem to mind. Her smirk is terrible, like
she’s totally convinced of her own
ma gni fi c e nc e . She  doesn’t    look
magnificent to me.
    Then the iron studs on her jacket
move. They float in the air, each one a
hard round bullet of metal. Then, like
shots from a gun, they rocket away from
Evangeline, digging into the dust and the
walls and even the lightning shield.
    She can control metal.
    Several boxes applaud for her, but
she’s far from finished. Groans and
clanks echo up to us from somewhere
deep down in the structure of the Spiral
Garden. Even the fat family stops eating
to look around, perplexed. They are
confused and intrigued, but I can feel the
vibrations deep beneath my feet. I know
to be afraid.
    With an earth-shattering noise, metal
pipes splinter the floor of the arena,
rising up from far below. They burst
through     the    walls,     surrounding
Evangeline in a twisted crown of gray
and silver metal. She looks like she’s
laughing, but the deafening crunch of
metal drowns her out. Sparks fall from
the lightning shield, and she protects
herself with scrap, not even breaking a
sweat. Finally she lets the metal drop
with a horrible smash. She turns her eyes
skyward, to the boxes above. Her mouth
is open wide, showing sharp little teeth.
She looks hungry.
    It starts slowly, a slight change in
balance, until the whole box lurches.
Plates crash to the floor and glass cups
roll forward, tumbling over the rail to
shatter on the lightning shield.
Evangeline is pulling our box out,
bending it forward, making us tip. The
Silvers around me squawk and scrabble,
their applause turning to panic. They’re
not the only ones—every box in our row
moves with us. Far below, Evangeline
directs with a hand, her brow furrowed
in focus. Like Silver fighters in the ring,
she wants to show the world what she’s
made of.
    That is the thought in my head as a
yellow ball of skin and feathered
clothing knocks into me, pitching me
over the rail with the rest of the
silverware.
     All I see is purple as I fall, the
lightning shield rising up to meet me. It
hisses with electricity, singeing the air. I
barely have time to understand, but I
know the veined purple glass will cook
me alive, electrocuting me in my red
uniform. I bet the Silvers will only care
about waiting for someone to clean me
off.
     My head bangs against the shield,
and I see stars. No, not stars. Sparks.
The shield does its job, lighting me up
with bolts of electricity. My uniform
burns, scorched and smoking, and I
expect to see my skin do the same. My
corpse will smell wonderful. But,
somehow, I don’t feel a thing. I must be
in so much pain that I cannot feel it.
     But—I can feel it. I feel the heat of
the sparks, running up and down my
body, setting every nerve on fire. It isn’t
a bad feeling though. In fact I feel, well,
alive. Like I’ve been living my whole
life blind and now I’ve opened my eyes.
Something moves beneath my skin, but
it’s not the sparks. I look at my hands,
my arms, marveling at the lightning as it
glides over me. Cloth burns away,
charred black by the heat, but my skin
doesn’t change. The shield keeps trying
to kill me, but it can’t.
    Everything is wrong.
    I am alive.
    The shield gives off a black smoke,
starting to splinter and crack. The sparks
are brighter, angrier, but weakening. I try
to push myself up, to get to my feet, but
the shield shatters beneath me and I fall
again, tumbling over myself.
    Somehow I manage to land in a pile
of dust not covered by jagged metal.
Definitely bruised and weak in the
muscles, but still in one piece. My
uniform is not so lucky, barely holding
together in a charred mess.
    I struggle to my feet, feeling more of
my uniform flake off. Above us, murmurs
and gasps echo through the Spiral
Garden. I can feel all eyes on me, the
burned Red girl. The human lightning
rod.
    Evangeline stares at me, her eyes
wide. She looks angry, confused—and
scared.
    Of me. Somehow, she is scared of
me.
    “Hi,” I say stupidly.
    Evangeline answers with a flurry of
metal shards, all of them sharp and
deadly, pointed at my heart as they rip
through the air.
    Without thinking, I throw up my
hands, hoping to save myself from the
worst of it. Instead of catching a dozen
jagged blades in my palms, I feel
something quite different. Like with the
sparks before, my nerves sing, alive
with some inner fire. It moves in me,
behind my eyes, beneath my skin, until I
feel more than myself. Then it bursts
from me, pure power and energy.
    A jet of light—no, lightning—erupts
from my hands, blazing through the
metal. The pieces shriek and smoke,
bursting apart in the heat. They fall
harmlessly to the ground as the lightning
blasts into the far wall. It leaves a
smoking hole four feet wide, barely
missing Evangeline.
    Her mouth falls open in shock. I’m
sure I look the same as I stare at my
hands, wondering what on earth just
happened to me. High above, a hundred
of the most powerful Silvers wonder the
same thing. I look up to see them all
peering at me.
     Even the king leans over the edge of
his box, his flaming crown silhouetted
against the sky. Cal is right next to him,
staring down at me with wide eyes.
     “Sentinels.”
     The king’s voice is sharp as a razor,
full of menace. Suddenly, the red-orange
uniforms of Sentinels blaze from almost
every box. The elite guards wait for
another word, another order.
     I’m a good thief because I know
when to run. Now is one of those times.
     Before the king can speak, I bolt,
pushing past the stunned Evangeline to
slide feetfirst into the still-open hatch in
the floor.
    “Seize her!” echoes behind me as I
drop into the semidarkness of the
chamber below. Evangeline’s flying
metal show punched holes in the ceiling,
and I can still see up into the Spiral
Garden. To my dismay, it looks like the
structure is bleeding, as uniformed
Sentinels drop down from their boxes,
all of them racing after me.
    With no time to think, all I can do is
run.
    The antechamber below the arena
connects to a dark and empty hallway.
Boxy black cameras watch me as I run at
full speed, turning down another
corridor and another. I can feel them,
hunting like the Sentinels not so far
behind me. Run, repeats in my head.
Run, run, run.
     I have to find a door, a window,
something to help me get my bearings. If
I can get outside, into the market maybe,
I might have a chance. I might.
     The first set of stairs I find leads up
to a long mirrored hall. But the cameras
are there as well, sitting in the corners of
the ceiling like great black bugs.
     A blast of gunfire explodes over my
head, forcing me to drop to the floor.
Two Sentinels, their uniforms the color
of fire, crash through a mirror and
charge at me. They’re just like Security,
I tell myself. Just bumbling officers who
don’t know you. They don’t know what
you can do.
    I don’t know what I can do.
    They expect me to run so I do the
opposite, storming the pair of them.
Their guns are big and powerful, but
bulky. Before they can get them up to
shoot, stab, or both, I drop to my knees
on the smooth marble floor, sliding
between the two giants. One of them
shouts after me, his voice exploding
another mirror in a storm of glass. By the
time they manage to change directions,
I’m already off and running again.
    When I finally find a window, it’s a
blessing and a curse. I skid to a stop in
front of a giant pane of diamondglass,
looking out to the vast forest. It’s right
there, just on the other side, just beyond
an impenetrable wall.
    All right, hands, now might be a
good time to do your thing. Nothing
happens, of course. Nothing happens
when I need it to.
    A blaze of heat takes me by surprise.
I turn to see an approaching wall of red
and orange and I know—the Sentinels
have found me. But the wall is hot,
flickering, almost solid. Fire. And
coming right at me.
    My voice is faint, weak, defeated, as
I laugh at my predicament. “Oh, great.”
    I turn to run but instead collide with
a broad wall of black fabric. Strong
arms wrap around me, holding me still
when I try to squirm away. Shock him,
light him up, I scream in my head. But
nothing happens. The miracle isn’t going
to save me again.
    The heat grows, threatening to crush
the air from my lungs. I survived
lightning today; I don’t want to press my
luck with fire.
    But it’s the smoke that’s going to kill
me. Thick and black and much too
strong, choking me. My vision swirls,
and my eyelids grow heavy. I hear
footsteps, shouting, the roar of fire as the
world darkens.
    “I’m sorry,” Cal’s voice says. I think
I’m dreaming.
                EIGHT

I’m on the porch, watching as Mom says
good-bye to my brother Bree. She
weeps, holding on to him tightly,
smoothing his freshly cut hair. Shade and
Tramy wait to catch her if her legs fail. I
know they want to cry too, watching
their oldest brother go, but for Mom’s
sake, they don’t. Next to me, Dad says
nothing, content to stare at the
legionnaire. Even in his armor of steel
plate and bulletproof fabric, the soldier
looks small next to my brother. Bree
could eat him alive, but he doesn’t. He
doesn’t do anything at all when the
legionnaire grabs his arm, pulling him
away from us. A shadow follows,
haunting after him on terrible dark
wings. The world spins around me, and
then I’m falling.
    I land a year later, my feet stuck in
the squelching mud beneath our house.
Now Mom holds on to Tramy, begging
with the legionnaire. Shade has to pull
her off. Somewhere, Gisa cries for her
favorite brother. Dad and I keep silent,
saving our tears. The shadow returns,
this time swirling around me, blotting
out the sky and the sun. I squeeze my
eyes shut, hoping it will leave me alone.
    When I open them again, I’m in
Shade’s arms, hugging him as tightly as I
can. He hasn’t cut his hair yet, and his
chin-length brown hair tickles the top of
my head. As I press myself to his chest, I
wince. My ear stings sharply, and I pull
back, seeing drops of red blood on my
brother’s shirt. Gisa and I had pierced
our ears again, with the tiny gift Shade
left us. I guess I did it wrong, as I do
everything wrong. This time, I feel the
shadow before I see it. And it feels
angry.
    It drags me through a parade of
memories, all raw wounds still healing.
Some of them are even dreams. No, they
are nightmares. My worst nightmares.
    A new world materializes around
me, forming a shadowed landscape of
smoke and ash. The Choke. I’ve never
been there, but I’ve heard enough to
imagine it. The land is flat, pocked with
craters from a thousand falling bombs.
Soldiers in stained red uniforms cower
in each of them, like blood filling a
wound. I float through them all,
searching the faces, looking for the
brothers I lost to smoke and shrapnel.
    Bree appears first, wrestling with a
blue-clad Lakelander in a puddle of
mud. I want to help him, but I keep
floating until he’s out of sight. Tramy
comes next, bending over a wounded
soldier, trying to keep him from bleeding
to death. His gentle features, so like
Gisa’s, are twisted in agony. I will
never forget the screams of pain and
frustration. As with Bree, I can’t help
him.
    Shade waits at the front of the line,
beyond even the bravest of warriors. He
stands on top of a ridge without regard
for the bombs or the guns or the
Lakelander army waiting on the other
side. He even has the gall to smile at me.
I can only watch when the ground
beneath his feet explodes, destroying
him in a plume of fire and ash.
    “Stop!” I manage to scream, reaching
for the smoke that was once my brother.
    The ash takes shape, re-forming into
the shadow. It engulfs me in darkness,
until a wave of memories overtakes me
again.     Gisa’s      hand.     Kilorn’s
conscription. Dad coming home half-
dead. They blur together, a swirl of too-
bright color that hurts my eyes.
Something is not right. The memories
move backward through the years, like
I’m watching my life in reverse. And
then there are events I can’t possibly
remember: learning to speak, to walk,
my child brothers passing me between
them while Mom scolds. This is
impossible.
    “Impossible,” the shadow says to
me. The voice is so sharp, I fear it might
crack my skull. I fall to my knees,
colliding with what feels like concrete.
    And then they’re gone. My brothers,
my parents, my sister, my memories, my
nightmares, gone. Concrete and steel
bars rise around me. A cage.
    I struggle to my feet, one hand on my
aching head as things come into focus. A
figure stares at me from beyond the bars.
A crown glitters on her head.
    “I’d bow, but I might fall over,” I
say to Queen Elara, and immediately I
wish I could call back the words. She’s
a Silver, I can’t talk to her that way. She
could put me in the stocks, take away my
rations, punish me, punish my family.
No, I realize in my growing horror.
She’s the queen. She could just kill me.
She could kill us all.
    But she doesn’t look offended.
Instead, she smirks. A wave of nausea
washes over me when I meet her eyes,
and I double over again.
     “That looks like a bow to me,” she
purrs, enjoying my pain.
     I fight the urge to vomit and reach out
to grab the bars. My fist clenches around
cold steel. “What are you doing to me?”
     “Not much of anything anymore. But
this—” She reaches through the bars to
touch my temple. The pain triples
beneath her finger, and I fall against the
bars, barely conscious enough to hold
on. “This is to keep you from doing
anything silly.”
     Tears sting my eyes, but I shake them
away. “Like stand on my own two feet?”
I manage to spit out. I can hardly think
through the pain, let alone be polite, but
still I manage to hold back a stream of
c ur s e s . For heaven’s sake, Mare
Barrow, hold your tongue.
    “Like electrocute something,” she
snaps.
    The pain ebbs, giving me enough
strength to make it to the metal bench.
When I rest my head against the cool
stone wall, her words sink in.
Electrocute.
    The memory flashes across my mind,
coming back in jagged pieces.
Evangeline, the lightning shield, the
sparks, and me. It’s not possible.
    “You are not Silver. Your parents
are Red, you are Red, and your blood is
red,” the queen murmurs, prowling
before the bars of my cage. “You are a
miracle, Mare Barrow, an impossibility.
Something even I can’t understand, and I
have seen all of you.”
    “That was you?” I almost screech,
reaching up to cradle my head again.
“You were in my mind? My memories?
My nightmares?”
    “If you know someone’s fear, you
know them.” She blinks at me like I’m
some stupid creature. “And I had to
know what it is we’re dealing with.”
    “I am not an it.”
    “What you are remains to be seen.
But be thankful for one thing, little
lightning girl,” she sneers, putting her
face against the bars. Suddenly my legs
seize up, losing all feeling like I sat on
them wrong. Like I’m paralyzed. Panic
rises in my chest as I realize I can’t even
wiggle my toes. This must be how Dad
feels, broken and useless. But somehow
I get to my feet, my legs moving on their
own, marching me toward the bars. On
the other side, the queen watches me.
Her blinks match my steps.
    She’s a whisper, and she’s playing
with me. When I’m close enough, she
grabs my face in her hands. I cry out as
the pain in my head multiplies. What I
would give now for the simple doom of
conscription.
    “You did that in front of hundreds of
Silvers, people who will ask questions,
people with power,” she hisses in my
ear, her sickly sweet breath washing
over my face. “That is the only reason
you are still alive.”
    My hands clench, and I wish for the
lightning again, but it doesn’t come. She
knows what I’m doing and laughs
openly. Stars explode behind my eyes,
clouding my vision, but I hear her go in a
swirl of rustling silk. My sight returns
just in time to see her dress disappear
around a corner, leaving me well and
truly alone in the cell. I barely make it
back to the bench, fighting the urge to
throw up.
    Exhaustion comes over me in waves,
starting in my muscles and sinking into
my bones. I am only human, and humans
are not supposed to deal with days like
today. With a jolt, I realize my wrist is
bare. The red band is gone, taken away.
What could that mean? Tears sting my
eyes, threatening to fall, but I will not
cry. I have that much pride left.
    I can fight the tears but not the
questions. Not the doubt growing in my
heart.
    What’s happening to me?
    What am I?

I open my eyes to see a Security officer
staring at me from the other side of the
bars. His silver buttons shine in the low
light, but they’re nothing compared to the
glare bouncing off his bald head.
    “You have to tell my family where I
am,” I blurt out, sitting straight up. At
least I said I loved them, I remember,
thinking back to our last moments.
    “I don’t have to do anything but take
you upstairs,” he replies, but without
much bite. The officer is a pillar of
calm. “Change your clothes.”
    Suddenly, I realize I still have a half-
burned uniform hanging off me. The
officer points at a neat pile of clothes
near the bars. He turns his back,
allowing me some semblance of privacy.
    The clothes are plain but fine, softer
than anything I’ve ever worn before. A
long-sleeved white shirt and black pants,
both of them decorated with a single
silver stripe down each side. There are
shoes as well, black oiled boots that rise
to my knees. To my surprise, there isn’t
a stitch of red on the clothes. But why, I
do not know. My ignorance is becoming
a theme.
    “All right,” I grumble, fighting the
last boot up my leg. As it slides into
place, the officer turns around. I don’t
hear the jingle of keys, but then, I don’t
see a lock. How he plans to let me out of
my doorless cage, I’m not sure.
    But instead of opening some hidden
gate, his hand twitches, and the metal
bars bow open. Of course. The jailor
would be a—
    “Magnetron, yes,” he says with a
waggle of his fingers. “And in case you
were wondering, the girl you nearly
fried is a cousin.”
    I almost choke on the air in my lungs,
not knowing how to respond. “I’m
sorry.” It sounds like a question.
    “Be sorry you missed her,” he
replies without a hint of jest.
“Evangeline is a bitch.”
    “Family trait?” My mouth moves
faster than my brain, and I gasp,
realizing what I’ve just said.
    He doesn’t strike me for speaking
out of turn, though he has every right to.
Instead, the officer’s face twitches into
the shadow of a smile. “I guess you’ll
find out,” he says, black eyes soft. “I’m
Lucas Samos. Follow me.”
    I don’t have to ask to know I have no
other choice in the matter.
    He leads me out of my cell and up a
winding stair, to no less than twelve
Security officers. Without a word, they
surround me in a well-practiced
formation and force me along with them.
Lucas stays by me, marching in time with
the others. They keep their guns in hand,
as if ready for battle. Something tells me
the men aren’t here to defend me but to
protect everyone else.
    When we reach the more beautiful
upper levels, the glass walls are
strangely black. Tinted, I tell myself,
remembering what Gisa said about the
Hall of the Sun. The diamondglass can
darken on command to hide what
shouldn’t be seen. Obviously, I must fall
into that category.
    With a jolt I realize that the windows
change not because of some mechanism
but a red-haired officer. She waves a
hand at every wall we pass, and some
power within her blocks out the light,
clouding the glass with thin shade.
    “She’s a shadow, a bender of light,”
Lucas whispers, noting my awe.
    The cameras are here as well. My
skin crawls, feeling their electric gaze
running over my bones. Normally my
head would ache under the weight of so
much electricity, but the pain never
comes. Something in the shield has
changed me. Or maybe it released
something, revealing a part of myself
locked away for so long. What am I?
echoes in my head again, more
threatening than before.
     Only when we pass through a
monstrous set of doors does the electric
sensation pass. The eyes cannot see me
here. The chamber inside could
encompass my house ten times, stilts and
all. And directly across from me, his
fiery gaze burning into mine, is the king,
sitting on a diamondglass throne carved
into an inferno. Behind him, a window
full of daylight quickly fades to black. It
might be the last glimpse of the sun I’ll
ever see.
     Lucas and the other officers march
me forward, but they don’t stay long.
With nothing but a backward glance,
Lucas leads the others out.
     The king sits before me, the queen
standing on his left, the princes on his
right. I refuse to look at Cal, but I know
he must be gawking at me. I keep my
gaze on my new boots, focusing on my
toes so I don’t give over to the fear
turning my body to lead.
    “You will kneel,” the queen
murmurs, her voice soft as velvet.
    I should kneel, but my pride won’t
let me. Even here, in front of Silvers, in
front of the king, my knees do not bend.
“I will not,” I say, finding the strength to
look up.
    “Do you enjoy your cell, girl?”
Tiberias says, his kingly voice filling the
room. The threat in his words is plain as
day, but still I stand. He cocks his head,
staring at me like I’m an experiment to
puzzle over.
    “What do you want with me?” I
manage to force out.
    The queen leans down next to him. “I
told you, she’s Red through and through
—” But the king waves her off like he
would a fly. She purses her lips and
draws back, hands clasped tightly
together. Serves her right.
    “What I want concerning you is
impossible,” Tiberias snaps. His glare
smolders, like he’s trying to burn me up.
    I remember the queen’s words.
“Well, I’m not sorry you can’t kill me.”
    The king chuckles. “They didn’t say
you were quick.”
    Relief floods through me. Death does
not wait for me here. Not yet.
    The king throws down a stack of
papers, all of them covered in writing.
The top sheet has the usual information,
including my name, birth date, parents,
and the little brown smear that is my
blood. My picture is there too, the one
on my identification card. I stare down
at myself, into bored eyes sick of
waiting in line to have my picture taken.
How I wish I could jump into the photo,
into the girl whose only problems were
conscription and a hungry belly.
    “Mare      Molly Barrow,        born
November seventeenth, 302 of the New
Era, to Daniel and Ruth Barrow,”
Tiberias recites from memory, laying my
life bare. “You have no occupation and
are scheduled for conscription on your
next birthday. You attend school
sparingly, your academic test scores are
low, and you have a list of offenses that
would land you in prison in most cities.
Thievery, smuggling, resisting arrest, to
name but a few. All together you are
poor, rude, immoral, unintelligent,
impoverished, bitter, stubborn, and a
blight upon your village and my
kingdom.”
    The shock of his blunt words takes a
moment to sink in, but when it does, I
don’t argue. He’s entirely right.
    “And yet,” he continues, rising to his
feet. This close, I can see his crown is
deathly sharp. The points can kill. “You
are also something else. Something I
cannot fathom. You are Red and Silver
both, a peculiarity with deadly
consequences you cannot understand. So
what am I to do with you?”
    Is he asking me? “You could let me
go. I wouldn’t say a word.”
    The queen’s sharp laughter cuts me
off. “And what about the High Houses?
Will they keep silent as well? Will they
forget the little lightning girl in a red
uniform?”
    No. No one will.
    “You know my advice, Tiberias,”
the queen adds, her eyes on the king.
“And it will solve both our problems.”
    It must be bad advice, bad for me,
because Cal clenches a fist. The
movement draws my eye, and I finally
look at him fully. He remains still, stoic
and quiet, as I’m sure he’s been trained
to do, but fire burns behind his eyes. For
a moment, he meets my gaze, but I look
away before I can call out and ask him to
save me.
    “Yes, Elara,” the king says, nodding
at his wife. “We cannot kill you, Mare
Barrow.” Not yet hangs in the air. “So
we are going to hide you in plain sight
where we can watch you, protect you,
and attempt to understand you.”
    The way his eyes gleam makes me
feel like a meal about to be devoured.
    “Father!” The word bursts from Cal,
but his brother—the paler, leaner prince
—grabs him by the arm, holding him
back from protesting further. He has a
calming effect, and Cal steps back in
line.
    Tiberias goes on, ignoring his son.
“You are no longer Mare Barrow, a Red
daughter of the Stilts.”
    “Then who am I?” I ask, my voice
shaking with dread, thinking of all the
awful things they can do to me.
    “Your father was Ethan Titanos,
general of the Iron Legion, killed when
you were an infant. A soldier, a Red
man, took you for his own and raised
you in the dirt, never telling you your
true parentage. You grew up believing
you were nothing, and now, thanks to
chance, you are made whole again. You
are Silver, a lady of a lost High House, a
noble with great power, and one day, a
princess of Norta.”
    Try as I might, I can’t hold back a
surprised yelp. “A Silver—a princess?”
    My eyes betray me, flying to Cal. A
princess must marry a prince.
    “You will marry my son Maven, and
you’ll do it without putting a toe out of
line.”
    I swear I hear my jaw hit the floor. A
wretched, embarrassing sound escapes
my mouth as I search for something to
say, but I’m honestly speechless. In front
of me, the younger prince looks equally
confused, sputtering just as loudly as I
want to. This time, it’s Cal’s turn to
restrain him, though his eyes are on me.
    The young prince manages to find his
voice. “I don’t understand,” he blurts
out, shrugging off Cal. He takes quick
steps toward his father. “She’s—why
—?” Usually I’d be offended, but I have
to agree with the prince’s reservations.
    “Quiet,” his mother snaps. “You will
obey.”
    He glares at her, every inch the
young son rebelling against his parents.
But his mother hardens, and the prince
backs down, knowing her wrath and
power as well as I do.
    My voice is faint, barely audible.
“This seems a bit . . . much.” There’s
simply no other way to describe it. “You
don’t want to make me a lady, much less
a princess.”
     Tiberias’s face cracks into a grim
smile. Like the queen, his teeth are
blindingly white. “Oh, but I do, my dear.
For the first time in your rudimentary
little life, you have a purpose.” The jab
feels like a slap across the face. “Here
we are, in the early stages of a badly
timed rebellion, with terrorist groups or
freedom fighters, or whatever the hell
these idiotic Red fools call themselves,
blowing things up in the name of
equality.”
     “The Scarlet Guard.” Farley. Shade.
As soon as the name crosses my mind, I
pray Queen Elara stays out of my head.
“They bombed—”
     “The capital, yes.” The king shrugs,
scratching his neck.
     My years in the shadows have taught
me many things. Who carries the most
money, who won’t notice you, and what
liars look like. The king is a liar, I
realize, watching as he forces another
shrug. He’s trying to be dismissive, and
it’s just not working. Something has him
scared of Farley, of the Scarlet Guard.
Something much bigger than a few
explosions.
     “And you,” he continues, leaning
forward. “You might be able to help us
stop there from being any more.”
     I’d laugh out loud if I wasn’t so
scared. “By marrying—sorry, what’s
your name again?”
    His cheeks go white in what I
assume is the Silver version of a blush.
After all, their blood is silver. “My
name is Maven,” he says, his voice soft
and quiet. Like Cal and his father, his
hair is glossy black, but the similarities
end there. While they are broad and
muscled, Maven is lean, with eyes like
clear water. “And I still don’t
understand.”
    “What Father is trying to say is that
she represents an opportunity for us,”
Cal says, cutting in to explain. Unlike his
brother, Cal’s voice is strong and
authoritative. It’s the voice of a king. “If
the Reds see her, a Silver by blood but
Red by nature, raised up with us, they
can be placated. It’s like an old fairy
tale, a commoner becoming the princess.
She’s their champion. They can look to
her instead of terrorists.” And then,
softer, but more important than anything
else: “She’s a distraction.”
    But this isn’t a fairy tale, or even a
dream. This is a nightmare. I’m being
locked away for the rest of my life,
forced into being someone else. Into
being one of them. A puppet. A show to
keep people happy, quiet, and
trampled.
    “And if we get the story right, the
High Houses will be satisfied too.
You’re the lost daughter of a war hero.
What better honor can we give you?”
    I meet his eyes, silently pleading. He
helped me once, maybe he can do it
again. But Cal tips his head from side to
side, shaking his head slowly. He can’t
help me here.
    “This isn’t a request, Lady Titanos,”
Tiberias says. He uses my new name, my
ne w title. “You will go through with
this, and you will do it properly.”
    Queen Elara turns her pale eyes on
me. “You will live here, as is the custom
for royal brides. Every day will be
scheduled at my discretion, and you will
be tutored in everything and anything
possible to make you”—she searches for
the word, chewing on her lip
—“suitable.” I don’t want to know what
that means. “You will be scrutinized.
From now on you live on the edge of a
knife. One false step, one wrong word,
and you will suffer for it.”
     My throat tightens, like I can feel the
chains the king and queen are wrapping
around me. “What about my life—?”
     “What life?” Elara crows. “Girl, you
have fallen head over heels into a
miracle.”
     Cal squeezes his eyes shut for a
moment, as if the sound of the queen’s
laughter pains him. “She means her
family. Mare—the girl—has a family.”
     Gisa, Mom, Dad, the boys, Kilorn—
a life taken away.
     “Oh, that,” the king huffs, plopping
back down into his chair. “I suppose
we’ll give them an allowance, keep them
quiet.”
    “I want my brothers brought home
from the war.” For once, I feel like I’ve
said something right. “And my friend,
Kilorn Warren. Don’t let the legions take
him either.”
    Tiberias responds in half a
heartbeat. A few Red soldiers mean
nothing to him. “Done.”
    It sounds less like a pardon and more
like a death sentence.
               NINE

Lady Mareena Titanos, born to Lady
Nora Nolle Titanos and Lord Ethan
Titanos, general of the Iron Legion.
Heiress to House Titanos. Mareena
Titanos. Titanos.
    My new name echoes in my head as
the Red maids prepare me for the
coming onslaught. The three girls work
quickly and efficiently, never speaking
to one another. They don’t ask me
questions either, even though they must
want to. Say nothing, I remember.
They’re not allowed to speak to me, and
they certainly aren’t allowed to talk
about me to anyone else. Even the
strange things, the Red things, I’m sure
they see.
     Over many agonizing minutes, they
try to make me suitable, bathing me,
styling me, painting me into the silly
thing I’m supposed to be. The makeup is
the worst, especially the thick white
paste applied to my skin. They go
through three pots of it, covering my
face, neck, collarbone, and arms with the
glittery wet powder. In the mirror, it
looks like the warmth is leeched from
me, as if the powder has covered the
heat in my skin. With a gasp, I realize
it’s supposed to hide my natural flush,
the red bloom in my skin, the red blood.
I’m pretending to be Silver, and when
they finish painting my face, I actually
look the part. With my newly pale skin
and darkened eyes and lips, I look cold,
cruel, a living razor. I look Silver. I look
beautiful. And I hate it.
    How long will this last? Betrothed
to a prince. Even in my head, it sounds
crazy. Because it is. No Silver in their
right mind would marry you, let alone a
prince of Norta. Not to calm rebellion,
not to hide your identity, not for
anything.
    Then why do this?
    When the maids pinch and pull me
into a gown, I feel like a corpse being
dressed for her funeral. I know it’s not
far from the truth. Red girls do not marry
Silver princes. I will never wear a
crown or sit on a throne. Something will
happen, an accident maybe. A lie will
raise me up, and one day another lie will
bring me down.
    The dress is a dark shade of purple
spattered with silver, made of silk and
sheer lace. All houses have a color, I
remember, thinking back to the rainbow
of families. The colors of Titanos, my
name, must be purple and silver.
    When one of the maids reaches for
my earrings, trying to take away the last
bit of my old life, a surge of fear pulses
through me. “Don’t touch them!”
    The girl jumps back, blinking
quickly, and the others freeze at my
outburst.
    “Sorry, I—” A Silver wouldn’t
apologize. I clear my throat, collecting
myself. “Leave the earrings.” My voice
sounds strong, hard—regal. “You can
change everything else, but leave the
earrings.”
    The three cheap pieces of metal,
each one a brother, aren’t going
anywhere.
    “The color suits you.”
    I whirl around to see the maids
stooped in identical bows. And standing
over them: Cal. Suddenly, I’m very glad
the makeup covers the blush spreading
over me.
    He gestures quickly, his hand moving
in a brushing motion, and the maids
scurry from the room like mice fleeing
from a cat.
    “I’m sort of new to this royal thing,
but I’m not sure you’re supposed to be
here. In my room,” I say, forcing as much
disdain into my voice as I can muster.
After all, it’s his fault I’m in this
forsaken mess.
    He takes a few steps toward me, and
on instinct, I take a step back. My feet
catch on the hem of my dress, making me
choose between not moving or falling
over. I don’t know which is less
desirable.
    “I came to apologize, something I
can’t really do with an audience.” He
stops short, noting my discomfort. A
muscle twitches in his cheek as he looks
me over, probably remembering the
hopeless girl who tried to pickpocket
him only last night. I look nothing like
her now. “I’m sorry for getting you into
this, Mare.”
    “Mareena.” The name even tastes
wrong. “That’s my name, remember?”
    “Then it’s a good thing Mare’s a
suitable nickname.”
    “I don’t think anything about me is
suitable.”
    Cal’s eyes rake over me, and my
skin burns under his gaze. “How do you
like Lucas?” he finally says, taking an
obliging step back.
    The Samos guard, the first decent
Silver I’ve met here. “He’s all right, I
suppose.” Perhaps the queen will take
him away if I reveal how gentle the
officer was to me.
    “Lucas is a good man. His family
thinks him weak for his kindness,” he
adds, eyes darkening a little. As if he
knows the feeling. “But he’ll serve you
well, and fairly. I’ll make sure of it.”
    How thoughtful. He’s given me a
kind jailer. But I bite my tongue. It
won’t do any good to snap at his mercy.
“Thank you, Your Highness.”
    The spark returns to his eyes, and a
smirk to his lips. “You know my name is
Cal.”
    “And you know my name, don’t
you?” I tell him bitterly. “You know
what I come from.”
    He barely nods, as if ashamed.
    “You have to take care of them.” My
family. Their faces swim before my
eyes, already so far away. “All of them,
for as long as you can.”
    “Of course I will.” He takes a step
toward me, closing the gap between us.
“I’m sorry,” he says again. The words
resound in my head, echoing off a
memory.
    The wall of fire. The choking
smoke. I’m sorry, I’m sorry, I’m sorry.
    It was Cal who caught me earlier,
who kept me from escaping this awful
place.
    “Are you sorry for stopping my one
chance of escape?”
    “You mean if you got past the
Sentinels, Security, the walls, the
woods, back to your village to wait until
the queen herself hunted you down?” he
replies, taking my accusations in stride.
“Stopping you was the best thing for you
and your family.”
    “I could’ve gotten away. You don’t
know me.”
    “I know the queen would tear the
world apart looking for the little
lightning girl.”
    “Don’t call me that.” The nickname
stings more than the fake name I’m still
getting used to. Little lightning girl.
“That’s what your mother calls me.”
    He laughs bitterly. “She’s not my
mother. She’s Maven’s, not mine.” Just
by the set of his jaw, I know not to press
the issue.
    “Oh,” is all I can say, my voice very
small. It fades quickly, a faint echo
against the vaulted ceiling. I crane my
neck, looking around at my new room for
the first time since I came in. It’s finer
than anything I’ve ever seen—marble
and glass, silk and feathers. The light has
changed, shifting to the orange color of
dusk. Night is coming. And with it, the
rest of my life.
    “I woke up this morning as one
person,” I mutter, more to myself than to
him, “and now I’m supposed to be
someone else entirely.”
    “You can do this.” I feel him take a
step toward me, his heat filling the room
in a way that makes my skin prickle. But
I don’t look up. I won’t.
    “How do you know?”
    “Because you must.” He bites his
lip, eyes shifting over me. “As beautiful
as this world is, it’s just as dangerous.
People who are not useful, people who
make mistakes, they can be removed.
You can be removed.”
    And I will be. Someday. But that is
not the only threat I face. “So the moment
I mess up could be my last?”
    He doesn’t speak, but I can see the
answer in his eyes. Yes.
    My fingers fiddle with the silver belt
at my waist, pulling it tight. If this was a
dream, I would wake up, but I don’t.
This is really happening. “What about
me? About”—I hold out my hands,
glaring at the infernal things—“this?”
    In response, Cal smiles. “I think
you’ll get the hang of it.”
    Then he holds up his own bare hand.
A strange contraption at his wrist,
something like a bracelet with two metal
ends, clicks, producing sparks. Instead
of disappearing in a flash, the sparks
glow and burst into red flame, giving off
a blast of heat. He’s a burner, he
controls heat and fire , I remember.
He’s a prince, and a dangerous one at
that. But the flame disappears as quickly
as it came, leaving only Cal’s
encouraging smile and the humming of
cameras hidden somewhere, watching
over everything.

The masked Sentinels on the edge of my
vision are a constant reminder of my
new position. I’m nearly a princess,
engaged to the second most eligible
bachelor in the country. And I’m a lie.
Cal is long gone, leaving me with my
guards. Lucas isn’t so bad, but the others
are stern and quiet, never looking me in
the eye. The guards and even Lucas are
wardens to keep me imprisoned in my
own skin, red behind a silver curtain that
can never be pulled away. If I fall, if I
even slip, I will die. And others will die
for my failure.
    As they escort me toward the feast, I
go over the story the queen drilled into
me, the pretty tale she was going to tell
the court. It’s simple, easy to remember,
but it still makes me cringe.
    I was born at the war front. My
parents were killed in an attack on the
camp. A Red soldier saved me from the
rubble and brought me home to a wife
who always wanted a daughter. They
raised me in the village called the
Stilts, and I was ignorant of my
birthright or my ability until this
morning. And now I am returned to my
rightful place.
    The thought makes me sick. My
rightful place is at home, with my
parents and Gisa and Kilorn. Not here.
    The Sentinels lead the way through
the maze of passages in the upper levels
of the palace. Like the Spiral Garden,
the architecture is all curves of stone,
glass, and metal, slowly turning
downward. Diamondglass is around
every corner, showing breathtaking
views of the marketplace, the river
valley, and the woods beyond. From this
height, I can see hills I didn’t know
existed rising in the distance, silhouetted
against the setting sun.
     “The last two floors are royal
apartments,” Lucas says, pointing up the
sloping, spiraling hallway. Sunlight
glitters like a firestorm, throwing
speckles of light down on us. “The lift
will take us down to the ballroom. Just
here.” Lucas reaches out, stopping next
to a metal wall. It reflects us dully, then
slides away when he waves a hand.
    The Sentinels usher us into a box
with no windows and harsh lighting. I
force myself to breathe, even though I’d
rather push out of what feels like a giant
metal coffin.
    I jump a mile when the lift suddenly
moves, making my pulse race. My breath
comes in short gasps as I look around in
wide-eyed fright, expecting to see the
others reacting in the same way. But no
one else seems to mind the fact that the
box we’re in is dropping. Only Lucas
notices my discomfort, and he slows our
descent a little.
    “The lift moves up and down, so we
don’t have to walk. This place is very
big, Lady Titanos,” he murmurs with the
ghost of a smile.
    I’m torn between wonder and fear as
we drop, and I breathe a sigh of relief
when Lucas opens the lift doors. We
march out into the mirrored hall I ran
through this morning. The broken mirrors
are already fixed—it looks like nothing
ever happened.
    When Queen Elara appears around
the corner, her own Sentinels in tow,
Lucas sweeps into a bow. Now she
wears black and red and silver, her
husband’s colors. With her blond hair
and pale skin, she looks downright
ghoulish.
    She grabs me by the arm, pulling me
to her as we walk. Her lips don’t move,
but I hear her voice all the same, echoing
in my head. This time it doesn’t hurt or
make me nauseous, but the sensation still
feels sick and wrong. I want to scream,
to claw her out of my head. But there’s
nothing I can do except hate her.
    The Titanos family were oblivions ,
she says, her voice all around. They
could explode things with a touch, like
the Lerolan girl did at Queenstrial.
When I try to remember the girl, Elara
projects an image of her directly into my
brain. It flashes, barely there, but still I
see a young girl in orange blow up rock
and sand like military bombs. Your
mother, Nora Nolle, was a storm like
the rest of House Nolle. Storms control
the weather, to an extent. It’s not
common, but their union resulted in
your unique abilities to control
electricity. Say no more, if anyone asks.
    What do you really want with me?
Even in my head, my voice quivers.
    Her laughter bounces inside my
skull, the only answer I’ll get.
    Remember the person you’re
supposed to be, and remember well, she
continues, ignoring my question. You are
pretending to be raised Red, but you’re
Silver by blood. You are now Red in the
head, Silver in the heart.
    A shiver of fear shoots through me.
    From now until the end of your
days, you must lie. Your life depends on
it, little lightning girl.
                 TEN

Elara leaves me standing in the
hallway, mulling over her words.
    I used to think there was only the
divide, Silver and Red, rich and poor,
kings and slaves. But there’s much more
in between, things I don’t understand,
and I’m right in the middle of it. I grew
up wondering if I’d have food for
supper; now I’m standing in a palace
about to be eaten alive.
    Red in the head, Silver in the heart
sticks with me, guiding my motions. My
eyes stay wide, taking in the grand
palace both Mare and Mareena had
never dreamed of, but my mouth presses
into a firm line. Mareena is impressed,
but she keeps her emotions in check. She
is cold and unfeeling.
    The doors at the end of the hall open,
revealing the biggest room I’ve ever
seen, bigger even than the throne room. I
don’t think I’ll ever get used to the sheer
size of this place. I step through the
doors onto a landing. Stairs lead down
to the floor, where every house sits in
cool expectation, their eyes forward.
Again, they keep to their colors. A few
mutter among themselves, probably
talking about me and my little show.
King Tiberias and Elara stand on a
raised surface a few feet higher than the
floor, facing the crowd of their subjects.
They never miss an opportunity to lord
over the others. Either they’re very vain
or very aware. To look powerful is to be
powerful.
    The princes match their parents in
different outfits of red and black, both
decorated with military medals. Cal
stands to his father’s right, his face still
and impassive. If he knows who he’s
going to marry, he doesn’t look happy
about it. Maven’s there too, on his
mother’s left, his face a storm cloud of
emotions. The younger brother is not as
good as Cal at hiding his feelings.
    At least I won’t have to deal with a
good liar.
    “The right of Queenstrial is always a
joyous event, representing the future of
our great kingdom and the bonds that
keep us strongly united in the face of our
enemies,” the king says, addressing the
crowd. They don’t see me yet, standing
on the edge of the room, looking down
on them all. “But as you saw today,
Queenstrial has brought forth more than
just the future queen.”
    He turns to Elara, who clasps the
king’s hand in her own with a dutiful
smile. Her shift from devilish villain to
blushing queen is astounding. “We all
remember our bright hope against the
darkness of war, our captain, our friend,
the General Ethan Titanos,” Elara says.
    People murmur over the room, in
fondness or sadness. Even the Samos
patriarch, Evangeline’s cruel father,
bows his head. “He led the Iron Legion
to victory, pushing back the lines of war
that had stood for nearly a hundred
years. The Lakelanders feared him; our
soldiers loved him.” I strongly doubt a
single Red soldier loved their Silver
general. “Lakelander spies killed our
beloved friend Ethan, sneaking across
the lines to destroy our one hope for
peace. His wife, the Lady Nora, a good
and just woman, died with him. On that
fateful day sixteen years ago, House
Titanos was lost. Friends were taken
from us. Our blood was spilled.”
    Silence settles on the room as the
queen pauses to dab at her eyes, wiping
away what I know are fake, forced tears.
A few of the girls, participants in
Queenstrial, fidget in their seats. They
don’t care about a dead general, and
neither does the queen, not really. This
is about me, about somehow slipping a
Red girl into a crown without anyone
noticing. It’s a magic trick, and the queen
is a skilled magician.
    Her eyes find me, blazing up to my
spot at the top of the stairs, and everyone
follows her gaze. Some look confused,
while others recognize me from this
morning. And a few stare at my dress.
They know the colors of House Titanos
better than I do and understand who I
am. Or at least who I’m pretending to be.
    “This morning we saw a miracle.
We watched a Red girl fall into the
arena like a bolt of lightning, wielding
power she should not have.” More
murmurs rise, and a few Silvers even
stand. The Samos girl looks furious, her
black eyes fixed on me.
    “The king and I interviewed the girl
extensively, trying to discover how she
came to be.” Interview is a funny way to
describe scrambling my brain. “She
isn’t Red, but she is still a miracle. My
friends, please welcome back to us Lady
Mareena Titanos, daughter of Ethan
Titanos. Lost and now found.”
    With a twitch of her hand, she
beckons me closer. I obey.
    I descend the stairs to stilted
applause, more focused on not tripping.
But my feet are sure, my face still, as I
plunge toward hundreds of faces
wondering, staring, suspecting. Lucas
and my guards don’t follow, staying on
the landing. I’m alone in front of these
people once again, and I’ve never felt so
bare, even with the layers of silk and
powder. Again, I’m grateful for all the
makeup. It’s my shield, between them
and the truth of who I am. A truth I don’t
even understand.
    The queen gestures to an open seat in
the front row of the crowd, and I make
my way to it. The Queenstrial girls
watch me, wondering why I’m here and
why I’m so important all of a sudden.
But they’re only curious, not angry. They
look at me with pity, empathizing as best
they can with my sad story. Except
Evangeline Samos. When I finally get to
my seat, she’s sitting right next to it, her
eyes glaring into mine. Gone are her
leather clothes and iron studs; now she
wears a dress of interlocked metal rings.
From the way her fingers tighten, I can
tell she wants nothing more than to wrap
her hands around my throat.
     “Saved from her parents’ fate, Lady
Mareena was taken from the front and
brought to a Red village not ten miles
from here,” the king continues, taking
over so he can tell the grand twist in my
tale. “Raised by Red parents, she
worked as a Red servant. And until this
morning, she believed she was one of
them.” The accompanying gasp makes
my teeth grind. “Mareena was a diamond
in the rough, working in my own palace,
the daughter of my late friend under my
nose. But no more. To atone for my
ignorance, and to repay her father and
her house for their great contributions to
the kingdom, I would like to take this
moment to announce the joining of House
Calore and the resurrected House
Titanos.”
    Another gasp, this one from the girls
of Queenstrial. They think I’m taking
Cal away from them. They think I’m
their competition. I raise my eyes to the
king, quietly pleading for him to continue
before one of the girls murders me.
     I can almost feel Evangeline’s cold
metal cutting into me. Her fingers lace
together tightly, knuckles white as she
resists the urge to skin me in front of
everyone. On her other side, her
brooding father puts a hand on her arm to
still her.
     When Maven steps forward, the
tension in the room deflates. He stutters
briefly, tripping over the words he’s
been taught, but he finds his voice.
“Lady Mareena.”
     Trying my best not to shake, I rise to
my feet and face him.
     “In the eyes of my royal father and
the noble court, I would ask for your
hand in marriage. I pledge myself to you,
Mareena Titanos. Will you accept?”
    My heart pounds as he speaks.
Though his words sound like a question,
I know I have no choice in my answer.
No matter how much I want to look
away, my eyes stay on Maven. He gives
me the smallest of encouraging smiles. I
wonder to myself which girl would’ve
been chosen for him.
    Who would I have chosen? If none
of this had happened, if Kilorn’s master
never died, if Gisa’s hand was never
broken, if nothing ever changed. If. It’s
the worst word in the world.
    Conscription. Survival. Green-eyed
children with my quick feet and
Kilorn’s last name . That future was
almost impossible before; now it’s
nonexistent.
    “I pledge myself to you, Maven
Calore,” I say, hammering the last nails
into my coffin. My voice quivers, but I
don’t stop. “I accept.”
    It carries such finality, slamming a
door on the rest of my life. I feel like
collapsing but somehow manage to sit
back down gracefully.
    Maven slinks back to his seat,
grateful to be out of the spotlight. His
mother pats him on the arm in
reassurance. She smiles softly, just for
him. Even Silvers love their children.
But she turns cold again as Cal stands,
her smile disappearing in a heartbeat.
    The air seems to go out of the room
as every girl inhales, waiting for his
decision. I doubt Cal had any say in
choosing a queen, but he plays his part
well, just like Maven, just like I’m trying
to do. He smiles brightly, flashing even
white teeth that make a few girls sigh,
but his warm eyes are terribly solemn.
    “I am my father’s heir, born to
privilege and power and strength. You
owe me your allegiance, just as I owe
you my life. It is my duty to serve you
and my kingdom as best I can—and
beyond.” He’s rehearsed his speech, but
the fervor Cal has can’t be faked. He
believes in himself, that he’ll be a good
king—or die trying. “I need a queen who
will sacrifice just as much as I will, to
maintain order, justice, and balance.”
    The Queenstrial girls lean forward,
eager to hear his next words. But
Evangeline doesn’t move, an obscene
smirk twisting her face. House Samos
looks equally calm. Her brother,
Ptolemus, even stifles a yawn. They
know who has been chosen.
    “Lady Evangeline.”
    There’s no gasp of surprise, no
shock or excitement from her. Even the
other girls, heartbroken as they are, sit
back with only dejected shrugs.
Everyone saw this coming. I remember
the fat family back in the Spiral Garden,
complaining that Evangeline Samos had
already won. They were right.
    With a fluid, cold grace, Evangeline
rises to her feet. She barely looks at Cal,
instead turning over her shoulder to
sneer at the crestfallen girls. She basks
in her moment of glory. A smile ghosts
over her face when her eyes fall on me. I
don’t miss the feral flash of teeth.
    When she turns back around, Cal
echoes his brother’s proposal. “In the
eyes of my royal father and the noble
court, I would ask for your hand in
marriage. I pledge myself to you,
Evangeline Samos. Will you accept?”
    “I pledge myself to you, Prince
Tiberias,” she says in a voice that is
oddly high and breathy, contrasting with
her hard appearance. “I accept.”
    With a triumphant smirk, Evangeline
sits back down and Cal retreats to his
own seat. He keeps a smile fixed in
place like a piece of armor, but she
doesn’t seem to notice.
    Then I feel a hand find my arm, nails
biting into my skin. I fight the urge to
jump out of my chair. Evangeline doesn’t
react, still staring straight ahead at the
place that will one day be hers. If this
were the Stilts, I’d knock a few of her
teeth out. Her fingers dig into me, down
to the flesh. If she draws blood, red
blood, our little game will be over
before it even has a chance to begin. But
she stops short of breaking skin, leaving
bruises the maids will have to hide.
    “Get in my way and I’ll kill you
slowly, little lightning girl,” she mutters
through her smile. Little lightning girl.
The nickname is really starting to get on
my nerves.
     To cement her point, the smooth
metal bracelet on her wrist shifts, turning
into a circle of sharp thorns. Each tip
glistens, begging to spill blood. I
swallow hard, trying not to move. But
she lets go quickly, returning her hand to
her lap. Once again, she’s the picture of
a demure Silver girl. If there was ever a
person begging for an elbow to the face,
it is Evangeline Samos.
     A quick glance around the room tells
me the court has turned sullen. Some
girls have tears in their eyes and throw
wolfish glares at Evangeline and even
me. They probably waited for this day
all their lives, only to fail. I want to hand
my betrothal over, to give away what
they so desperately want, but no. I must
look happy. I must pretend.
     “As wonderful and happy as today
has been,” King Tiberias says, ignoring
the sentiment in the room, “I must remind
you why this choice has been made. The
might of House Samos joined with my
son, and all his children to follow, will
help guide our nation. You all know the
precarious state of our kingdom, with
war in the north and foolish extremists,
enemies to our way of life, attempting to
destroy us from within. The Scarlet
Guard       might seem small              and
insignificant to us, but they represent a
dangerous turn for our Red brothers.”
More than a few people in the crowd
scoff at the term brothers, myself
included.
    Small and insignificant. Then why
do they need me? Why use me, if the
Scarlet Guard is nothing to them? The
king is a liar. But what he’s trying to
hide, I’m still not sure. It could be the
Guard’s strength. It could be me.
    It’s probably both.
    “Should this rebellious streak take
hold,” he continues, “it will end in
bloodshed and a divided nation,
something I cannot bear. We must
maintain the balance. Evangeline and
Mareena will help do that, for the sake
of us all.”
    Murmurs go through the crowd at the
king’s words. Some nod, others look
cross at the Queenstrial choices, but no
one voices their dissent. No one speaks
up. No one would listen if they did.
    Smiling, King Tiberias bows his
head. He has won, and he knows it.
“Strength and power,” he repeats. The
motto echoes out from him, as every
person says the words.
    The words trip over my tongue,
feeling foreign in my mouth. Cal stares
down at me, watching me chant along
with all the others. In that moment, I hate
myself.
    “Strength and power.”

I suffer through the feast, watching but
not seeing, hearing but not listening.
Even the food, more food than I’ve ever
seen, tastes plain in my mouth. I should
be stuffing my face, enjoying what’s
probably the best meal of my life, but I
can’t. I can’t even speak when Maven
murmurs to me, his voice calm and level
in assurance.
    “You’re doing fine,” he says, but I
try to ignore him. Like his brother, he
wears the same metal bracelet, the
flamemaker. It’s a firm reminder of
exactly who and what Maven is—
powerful, dangerous, a burner, a Silver.
    Sitting at a table made of crystal,
drinking bubbly gold liquid until my
head spins, I feel like a traitor. What are
my parents eating for dinner tonight?
Do they even know where I am? Or is
Mom sitting on the porch, waiting for
me to come home?
    Instead, I’m stuck in a room full of
people who would kill me if they knew
the truth. And the royals of course, who
would kill me if they could, who
probably will kill me one day. They’ve
pulled me inside out, swapping Mare for
Mareena, a thief for a crown, rags for
silk, Red for Silver. This morning I was
a servant, tonight I’m a princess. How
much more will change? What else will
I lose?
    “That’s enough of that,” Maven says,
his voice swimming through the din of
the feast. He pulls away my fancy goblet,
replacing it with a glass of water.
    “I liked that drink.” But I gulp down
the water greedily, feeling my head
clear.
    Maven just shrugs. “You’ll thank me
later.”
    “Thank you,” I snap as snidely as
possible. I haven’t forgotten the way he
looked at me this morning, like I was
something on the bottom of his shoe. But
now his gaze is softer, calmer, more like
Cal’s.
    “I’m sorry about earlier today,
Mareena.”
    My name is Mare. “I’m sure you
are,” comes out instead.
    “Really,” he says, leaning toward
me. We’re seated side by side, with the
rest of the royals, at the high table. “It’s
just—usually younger princes get to
choose. One of the few perks of not
being the heir,” he adds with a terribly
forced smile.
    Oh. “I didn’t know that,” I reply, not
really knowing what to say. I should feel
sorry for him, but I can’t bring myself to
feel any kind of pity for a prince.
    “Yeah, well, you wouldn’t. It’s not
your fault.”
    He looks back to the feasting hall,
casting his gaze out like a fishing line. I
wonder what face he’s looking for. “Is
she here?” I murmur, trying to sound
apologetic. “The girl you would have
chosen?”
    He hesitates, then shakes his head.
“No, I didn’t have anyone in mind. But it
was nice to have the option of a choice,
you know?”
    No, I don’t know. I don’t have the
luxury of choice. Not now, not ever.
    “Not like my brother. He grew up
knowing he’d never have a say in his
future. I guess now I’m getting a taste of
what he feels.”
    “You and your brother have
everything, Prince Maven,” I whisper in
a voice so fervent it might be a prayer.
“You live in a palace, you have strength,
you have power. You wouldn’t know
hardship if it kicked you in the teeth, and
believe me, it does that a lot. So excuse
me if I don’t feel sorry for either of
you.”
    There I go, letting my mouth run
away with my brain. As I recover,
drinking down the rest of the water in an
attempt to cool my temper, Maven just
stares at me, his eyes cold. But the wall
of ice recedes, melting as his gaze
softens.
    “You’re right, Mare. No one should
feel sorry for me.” I can hear the
bitterness in his voice. With a shiver, I
watch him throw a glance at Cal. His
older brother beams like the sun,
laughing with their father. When Maven
turns back around, he forces another
smile, but there’s a surprising sadness in
his eyes.
    As much as I try, I can’t ignore the
sudden jolt of pity I feel for the forgotten
prince. But it passes when I remember
who he is and who I am.
    I’m a Red girl in a sea of Silvers,
and I can’t afford to feel sorry for
anyone, least of all the son of a snake.
              ELEVEN

The crowd toasts at the end of the feast,
their glasses raised to the royal table. On
they go, lords and ladies in a rainbow of
color trying to wiggle their way into
favor. I’ll have to learn them all soon,
matching color to house and house to
people. Maven whispers their names to
me in turn, even though I won’t
remember them tomorrow. At first it’s
annoying, but soon I find myself leaning
in to hear the names.
     Lord Samos is the last to stand, and
when he does, a hush falls. This man
commands respect, even among titans.
Though his black robes are plain,
trimmed with simple silk, and he has no
great jewels or badges to speak of, he
has the undeniable air of power. I don’t
need Maven to tell me he’s the highest of
the High Houses, a person to be feared
above all others.
     “Volo Samos,” Maven murmurs.
“Head of House Samos. He owns and
operates the iron mines. Every gun in the
war comes from his land.”
     So he’s not just a noble. His
importance comes from more than just
titles.
     Volo’s toast is short and to the point.
“To my daughter,” he rumbles, his voice
low, steady, and strong. “The future
queen.”
     “To Evangeline!” Ptolemus shouts,
jumping to his feet next to his father. His
eyes blaze around the room, daring
someone to oppose them. A few lords
and ladies look annoyed, angry even, but
they raise their cups with the rest,
saluting the new princess. Their glasses
reflect the light, each one a tiny star in
the hand of a god.
     When he finishes, Queen Elara and
King Tiberias rise, both of them smiling
at their many guests. Cal gets up as well,
then Evangeline, then Maven, and after
one dumb moment, I join them. The many
houses do the same at their tables, and
the scraping of chairs on marble sounds
like nails on a stone. Thankfully, the king
and queen simply bow and walk down
the short set of steps leading away from
our high table. It’s over . I’ve made it
through my first night.
    Cal takes Evangeline’s hand and
leads her after them, with Maven and me
bringing up the rear. When Maven takes
my hand, his skin is shockingly cold.
    The Silvers press in on both sides,
watching us pass in heavy silence. Their
faces are curious, cunning, cruel—and
behind every false smile is a reminder;
they are watching. Every eye scraping
over me, looking for cracks and
imperfections, makes me squirm, but I
cannot break.
    I cannot slip. Not now, not ever. I’m
one of them. I’m special. I’m an
accident. I’m a lie. And my life depends
on maintaining the illusion.
    Maven tightens his fingers in mine,
willing me onward. “It’s almost over,”
he whispers as we near the far end of the
hall. “Almost there.”
    The feeling of being smothered
passes as we leave the feast behind, but
the cameras follow us with heavy,
electric eyes. The more I think about it,
the stronger their gaze becomes, until I
can sense where the cameras are before
I see them. Maybe this is a side effect of
my “condition.” Maybe I’ve just never
been surrounded by this much electricity
before, and this is how everyone feels.
Or maybe I’m just a freak.
    Back in the passageway, a group of
Sentinels waits to escort us upstairs. But
then, what threats could there possibly
be to these people? Cal, Maven, and
King Tiberias can control fire. Elara can
control minds. What could they fear?
    We will rise, Red as the dawn .
Farley’s voice, my brother’s words, the
creed of the Scarlet Guard, comes back
to me. They attacked the capital already;
this could even be their next target. I
could be a target. Farley could hold me
up in another hijacked broadcast,
revealing me to the world in an attempt
to undermine the Silvers. “Look at their
lies, look at this lie,” she would say,
pushing my face into the camera,
bleeding me red for all the world to see.
     Crazier and crazier thoughts come to
mind, each one more frightening and
outlandish than the last. This place is
making me insane after just one day.
     “That went well,” Elara says,
snatching her hand away from the king
when we reach the residence floors. He
doesn’t seem to mind in the least. “Take
the girls to their rooms.”
     She doesn’t direct her command at
anyone in particular, but four Sentinels
break off from the group. Their eyes
glitter behind their black masks.
     “I can do it,” Cal and Maven say in
unison. They glance at each other,
startled.
     Elara raises one perfect eyebrow.
“That would be inappropriate.”
    “I’ll escort Mareena, Mavey can
take Evangeline,” Cal offers quickly,
and Maven purses his lips at the
nickname. Mavey. Probably what Cal
called him as a boy and now it’s stuck,
the emblem of a younger brother, always
in shadow, always second.
    The king shrugs. “Let them, Elara.
The girls need a good night of sleep, and
Sentinels would give any lady bad
dreams.” He chuckles, tossing a playful
nod at the guards. They don’t respond,
silent as stone. I don’t know if they’re
allowed to talk at all.
    After a moment of tense silence, the
queen turns on her heel. “Very well.”
Like any wife, she hates her husband for
challenging her, and like any queen, she
hates the power the king holds over her.
A bad combination.
    “To bed,” the king says, his voice a
bit more forceful and authoritative. The
Sentinels stay with him, following when
he goes the opposite way from his wife.
I guess they don’t sleep in the same
room, but that’s not much of a shock.
    “My room is where, exactly?”
Evangeline asks, glaring at Maven. The
blushing queen-to-be is gone, replaced
by the sharp she-devil I recognize.
    He gulps at the sight of her. “Uh, this
way, miss—ma’am—my lady.” He
holds out an arm to her, but she breezes
right by him. “Good night, Cal,
Mareena,” Maven sighs, making a point
of looking at me.
      I can only nod at the retreating
p r i nc e . My betrothed. The thought
makes me want to be sick. Even though
he seemed polite, nice even, he’s Silver.
And he’s Elara’s son, which might be
even worse. His smiles and kind words
cannot hide that from me. Cal’s just as
bad, raised to rule, to perpetuate this
world of division even further.
      He watches Evangeline disappear,
his eyes lingering on her retreating form
in a way that makes me strangely
annoyed.
      “You picked a real winner,” I mutter
once she’s out of earshot.
     Cal’s smile dies with a downward
twitch, and he starts walking toward my
room, ascending the sloping spiral. My
little legs fight to keep up with his long
strides, but he doesn’t seem to notice,
lost in thought.
     Finally he turns, his eyes like hot
coals. “I didn’t pick anything. Everyone
knows that.”
     “At least you knew this was coming.
I woke up this morning and didn’t even
have a boyfriend.” Cal winces at my
words, but I don’t care. I can’t handle
his self-pity. “And, you know, there’s
the ‘you’re going to be king’ thing. That
must be a boost.”
     He chuckles to himself, but he’s not
laughing. His eyes darken, and he takes a
step forward, surveying me from head to
toe. Instead of looking judgmental, he
seems sad. Deeply sad in the red-gold
pools of his eyes, a little boy lost,
looking for someone to save him.
    “You’re a lot like Maven,” he says
after a long moment that makes my heart
race.
    “You mean engaged to a stranger?
We do have that in common.”
    “You’re both very smart.” I can’t
help but snort. Cal obviously doesn’t
know I can’t get through a fourteen-year-
old’s math test. “You know people, you
understand them, you see through them.”
    “I did a great job of that last night. I
definitely knew you were the crown
prince the whole time.” I still can’t
believe it was only last night. What a
difference a day makes.
    “You knew I didn’t belong.”
    His sadness is contagious, sending
an ache over me. “So we’ve switched
places.”
    Suddenly the palace doesn’t seem so
beautiful or so magnificent. The hard
metal and stone is too severe, too bright,
too unnatural, trapping me in. And
underneath it all, the electric buzz of
cameras drones on. It’s not even a sound
but a feeling in my skin, in my bones, in
my blood. My mind reaches out to the
electricity, as if on instinct. Stop, I tell
myself. Stop. The hair stands up on my
arm as something sizzles beneath my
skin, a crackling energy I can’t control.
Of course it returns now, when it’s the
last thing I want.
    But the feeling passes as quickly as
it came, and the electricity shifts to a
low hum again, letting the world return
to normal.
    “Are you okay?”
    Cal stares down at me, confused.
    “Sorry,” I mumble, shaking my head.
“Just thinking.”
    He nods, looking almost apologetic.
“About your family?”
    The words hit me like a slap. They
hadn’t even crossed my mind in the last
few hours, and it sickens me. A few
hours of silk and royalty have already
changed me.
    “I’ve sent a conscript release for
your brothers and your friend, and an
officer to your house, to tell your parents
where you are,” Cal continues, thinking
this might calm me. “We can’t tell them
everything though.”
    I can only imagine how that went.
Oh, hello. Your daughter is a Silver
now, and she’s going to marry a prince.
You’ll never see her again, but we’ll
send you some money to help out. Even
trade, don’t you think?
    “They know you work for us and
have to live here, but they still think
you’re a servant. For now, at least.
When your life becomes more public,
we’ll figure out how to deal with them.”
    “Can I write to them at least?”
Shade’s letters were always a bright
spot in our dark days. Maybe mine will
be the same.
    But Cal shakes his head. “I’m sorry,
that’s just not possible.”
    “I didn’t think so.”
    He ushers me into my room, which
quickly sparkles to life. Motion-
activated lights, I think. Like back in the
hallway, my senses sharpen and
everything electrical becomes a burning
feeling in my mind. Immediately I know
there are no less than four cameras in my
room and that makes me squirm.
    “It’s for your own protection. If
anyone were to intercept the letters, to
find out about you—”
    “Are the cameras in here for my own
protection?” I ask, gesturing to the
walls. The cameras stab into my skin,
watching every inch of me. It’s
maddening, and after a day like today, I
don’t know how much more I can take.
“I’m locked in this nightmare palace,
surrounded by walls and guards and
people who will tear me to shreds, and I
can’t even get a moment’s peace in my
own room.”
    Instead of snapping back at me, Cal
looks bewildered. His eyes blaze
around. The walls are bare, but he must
be able to sense them too. How can
anyone not feel the eyes pressing down?
    “Mare, there aren’t any cameras in
here.”
    I wave a hand at him, dismissive.
The electrical hum still breaks against
my skin. “Don’t be stupid. I can feel
them.”
    Now he truly looks lost. “Feel them?
What do you mean?”
    “I—” But the words die in my throat
as I realize: he doesn’t feel anything. He
doesn’t even know what I’m saying.
How can I explain this to him, if he
doesn’t already know? How can I tell
him I feel the energy in the air like a
pulse, like another part of me? Like
another sense? Would he even
understand?
    Would anyone?
    “Is that—not normal?”
    Something flickers in his eyes as he
hesitates, trying to find the words to tell
me I’m different. Even among the
Silvers, I’m something else.
    “Not to my knowledge,” he finally
says.
    My voice sounds small, even to me.
“I don’t think anything about me is
normal anymore.”
    He opens his mouth to speak but
thinks better of it. There’s nothing he can
say to make me feel better. There’s
nothing he can do for me at all.
    In the fairy tales, the poor girl smiles
when she becomes a princess. Right
now, I don’t know if I’ll ever smile
again.
              TWELVE

       Your schedule is as follows:

      0730—Breakfast / 0800—
   Protocol / 1130 Luncheon
      1300—Lessons / 1800—
   Dinner.
      Lucas will escort you to all.
   Schedule is not negotiable.

      Her Royal Highness Queen
   Elara of House Merandus.

The note is short and to the point, not to
mention rude. My mind swims at the
thought    of five hours of Lessons,
remembering how terrible I was at
school. With a groan, I throw the note
back down on the nightstand. It lands in
a pool of golden morning light, just to
tease me.
     Like yesterday, the three maids
flutter in, quiet as a whisper. Fifteen
minutes later, after suffering through tight
leather leggings, a draping gown, and
other strange, impractical clothes, we
settle on the plainest thing I can find in
the closet of wonders. Stretchy but
sturdy black pants, a purple jacket with
silver buttons, and polished gray boots.
Besides the glossy hair and the war
paint, I almost look like myself again.
     Lucas waits on the other side of the
door, one foot tapping against the stone
floor. “One minute behind schedule,” he
says the second I step into the hall.
    “Are you going to babysit me every
day or just until I learn my way around?”
    He falls into step beside me, gently
guiding me in the right direction. “What
do you think?”
    “Here’s to a long and happy
friendship, Officer Samos.”
    “Likewise, my lady.”
    “Don’t call me that.”
    “Whatever you say, my lady.”
    Next to last night’s feast, breakfast
looks dull in comparison. The “smaller”
dining room is still large, with a high
ceiling and a view of the river, but the
long table is only set for three.
Unfortunately for me, the other two
happen to be Elara and Evangeline.
They’re already halfway through their
bowls of fruit by the time I shuffle in.
Elara barely glances at me, but
Evangeline’s sharp-eyed stare is enough
for both of them. With the sun bouncing
off her metal getup, she looks like a
blinding star.
    “You should eat quickly,” the queen
says without looking up. “Lady Blonos
does not tolerate tardiness.”
    Across from me, Evangeline laughs
into her hand. “You’re still taking
Protocol?”
    “You mean you aren’t?” My heart
leaps at the prospect of not having to sit
through classes with her. “Excellent.”
    Evangeline scoffs at me, brushing off
the insult. “Only children take Protocol.”
    To my surprise, the queen takes my
side. “Lady Mareena has grown up
under terrible circumstances. She knows
nothing of our ways, of the expectations
she must fulfill now. Surely you
understand her needs, Evangeline?”
    The reprimand is calm, quiet, and
threatening. Evangeline’s smile drops,
and she nods, not daring to meet the
queen’s eye.
    “Luncheon today will be on the
Glass Terrace, with the ladies of
Queenstrial and their mothers. Try not to
gloat,” Elara adds, though I never
would. Evangeline, on the other hand,
blushes white.
    “They’re still here?” I hear myself
ask. “Even after—not being chosen?”
    Elara nods. “Our guests will be here
for the coming weeks, to properly honor
the prince and his betrothed. They won’t
leave until after the Parting Ball.”
    My heart plummets in my chest until
it bounces around my toes. So more
nights like last night, with the pressing
crowd and a thousand eyes. They’ll ask
questions too, questions I’ll have to
answer. “Lovely.”
    “And after the ball, we leave with
them,” Elara continues, twisting the
knife. “To return to the capital.”
    The capital. Archeon. I know the
royal family goes back to Whitefire
Palace at the end of every summer, and
now I’m going too. I’ll have to leave,
and this world I can’t understand will
become my only reality. I’ll never be
able to go home. You knew this , I tell
mysel f, you agreed to this. But it
doesn’t hurt any less.

When I escape back into the hallway,
Lucas ushers me down the passage. As
we walk, he smirks at me. “You have
watermelon on your face.”
    “Of course I do,” I snap, wiping at
my mouth with my sleeve.
    “Lady Blonos is just through here,”
he says, gesturing to the end of the hall.
    “What’s the story about her? Can she
fly or make flowers grow out of her
ears?”
     Lucas cracks a smile, humoring me.
“Not quite. She’s a healer. Now, there’s
two kinds of healers: skin healers and
blood healers. All of House Blonos are
blood healers, meaning they can heal
themselves. I could throw her off the top
of the Hall and she’d walk away without
a scratch.”
     I’d like to see that tested, but I don’t
say so out loud. “I’ve never heard of a
blood healer before.”
     “You wouldn’t have, since they’re
not allowed to fight in the arenas.
There’s simply no point in them doing
it.”
     Wow. Yet another Silver of epic
proportions. “So if I have, um, an
episode—”
    Lucas softens, understanding what
I’m trying to say. “She’ll be just fine.
The curtains, on the other hand . . .”
    “That’s why they gave her to me.
Because I’m dangerous.”
    But Lucas shakes his head. “Lady
Titanos, they gave her to you because
your posture is terrible and you eat like
a dog. Bess Blonos is going to teach you
how to be a lady and if you light her up a
couple of times, no one will blame you.”
    How to be a lady . . . this will be
awful.
    He raps his knuckles on the door,
making me jump. It swings open on
silent, smooth hinges, revealing a sunlit
room.
    “I’ll be back to bring you to lunch,”
he says. I don’t move, my feet planted,
but Lucas nudges me into the dreaded
room.
    The door swings behind me, this
time shutting out the hall and anything
that might calm me down. The room is
fine but plain with a wall of windows,
and totally empty. The buzzing of
cameras, lights, electricity, is vibrantly
strong in here, almost burning the air
around me with its energy. I’m sure the
queen is watching, ready to laugh at my
attempts to be proper.
    “Hello?” I say, expecting a response,
but nothing comes
    I cross to the windows, looking out
on the courtyard. Instead of another
pretty garden, I’m surprised to find this
window doesn’t face outside at all but
down into a gigantic white room.
    The floor is several stories below
me, and a track rings the outer edge. In
the center, a strange contraption moves
and turns, spinning round and round with
outstretched metal arms. Men and
women, all in uniform, dodge the
spinning machine. It picks up speed,
twirling faster, until only two remain.
They’re quick, dipping and dodging with
grace and speed. At every turn the
machine accelerates, until it finally
slows, shutting down. They’ve beaten it.
    This must be some kind of training,
for Security or Sentinels.
    But when the two trainees move on
to target practice, I realize they aren’t
Security at all. The pair of them shoot
bright red fireballs into the air,
exploding targets as they rise and fall.
Each one is a perfect shot, and even
from up here, I recognize their smiling
faces. Cal and Maven.
    So this is what they do during the
day. Not learning to rule, to be a king, or
even a proper lord, but to train for war.
Cal and Maven are deadly creatures,
soldiers. But their battle isn’t just on the
lines. It’s here, in a palace, on the
broadcasts, in the heart of every person
they rule. They will rule, not just by right
of a crown but by might. Strength and
power. It’s all the Silvers respect, and
it’s all it takes to keep the rest of us
slaves.
     Evangeline steps up next. When the
targets fly, she throws out a fan of sharp
silver metal darts to take down each one
in turn. No wonder she laughed at me for
Protocol. While I’m in here learning
how to eat properly, she’s training to
kill.
     “Enjoying      the    show,      Lady
Mareena?” a voice crows behind me. I
turn around, my nerves tingling a bit.
What I see doesn’t do anything to calm
me.
     Lady Blonos is a horrifying sight,
and it takes all of my manners to keep
my jaw from dropping. Blood healer,
able to heal herself. I understand now
what that means.
    She must be over fifty, older than my
mother, but her skin is smooth and
shockingly tight over her bones. Her hair
is perfectly white, slicked back, and her
eyebrows seem fixed in a constant state
of shock, arched on her unwrinkled
forehead. Everything about her is wrong,
from her too-full lips to the sharp,
unnatural slope of her nose. Only her
deep gray eyes look alive. The rest, I
realize, is fake. Somehow she was able
to heal or change herself into this
monstrous thing in an attempt to look
younger, prettier, better.
     “Sorry,” I finally manage, “I came
in, and you weren’t—”
     “I observed,” she clips, already
hating me. “You stand like a tree in a
storm.”
     She seizes my shoulders and pulls
them back, forcing me to stand up
straight. “My name is Bess Blonos, and
I’m going to attempt to make you a lady.
You’re going to be a princess one day,
and we can’t have you acting like a
savage, can we?”
     Savage. For a brief, shining moment,
I think about spitting in silly Lady
Blonos’s face. But what would that cost
me? What would that accomplish? And
it would only prove her right. Worst of
all, I realize I need her. Her training will
keep me from slipping and, most
important, keep me alive.
     “No,” a hollow shell of my voice
answers. “We can’t have that.”

Exactly three and a half hours later,
Blonos releases me from her clutches
and back into Lucas’s care. My back
aches from the posture lessons about
how to sit, stand, walk, and even sleep
(on your back, arms at your sides,
always still), but it’s nothing compared
to the mental exercise she put me
through. She drilled the rules of court
into my head, filling me with names,
protocols, and etiquette. In the last few
hours I received a crash course in
anything and everything I’m supposed to
know. The hierarchy among the High
Houses is slowly coming into focus, but
I’m sure I’ll mess up something anyway.
We only scratched the surface of
Protocol, but now I can go to the queen’s
stupid function with at least some idea of
how to act.
     The Glass Terrace is relatively
close by, only a floor down and a
hallway over, so I don’t get much time to
collect myself before facing Elara and
Evangeline again. This time, when I step
through the doorway, I’m greeted by
invigorating fresh air. I’m outside for the
first time since I became Mareena, but
now, with the wind in my lungs and the
sun on my face, I feel more like Mare
again. If I close my eyes, I can pretend
none of this ever happened. But it did.
     The Glass Terrace is as ornate as
Blonos’s classroom was bare and lives
up to its name. A glass canopy,
supported by clear, artfully cut columns,
stretches over us, refracting the sun into
a million dancing colors to match the
women milling about. It’s beautiful in an
artificial way, like everything else in
this Silver world.
     Before I have a chance to take a
breath, a pair of girls steps in front of
me. Their smiles are fake and cold, just
like their eyes. Judging by the colors of
their gowns (dark blue and red on one,
solid black on the other), they belong to
House Iral and House Haven. Silks and
shadows, I remember, thinking back to
Blonos’s lessons on abilities.
    “Lady Mareena,” they say in unison,
bowing stiffly. I do the same, inclining
my head the way Lady Blonos showed
me.
    “I’m Sonya of House Iral,” the first
says, tossing her head proudly. Her
movements are lithe and catlike. Silks
are quick and quiet, perfectly balanced
and agile.
    “And I’m Elane of House Haven,”
the other adds, her voice barely a
whisper. While the Iral girl is dark, with
deeply tanned skin and black hair, Elane
is pale, with glossy red locks. The
dancing sunlight speckles her skin in a
perfect halo, making her look flawless.
Shadow, bender of light. “We wanted to
welcome you.”
     But their pointed smiles and
narrowed eyes don’t look welcoming at
all.
     “Thank you. That’s very kind.” I
clear my throat, trying to sound normal,
and the girls don’t miss the action,
exchanging      glances.     “You    also
participated in Queenstrial?” I say
quickly, hoping to distract them from my
terrible social graces.
     This only seems to incense them.
Sonya crosses her arms, showing sharp
nails the color of iron. “We did.
Obviously we were not so lucky as you
or Evangeline.”
    “Sorry—,” comes out before I can
stop it. Mareena would not apologize.
“I mean, you know I had no intention of
—”
    “Your intentions remain to be seen,”
Sonya purrs, looking more like a cat
with every passing second. When she
turns, snapping her fingers in a way that
makes her nails slice along each other, I
flinch. “Grandmother, come meet Lady
Mareena.”
    Grandmother. I almost breathe a
sigh of relief, expecting a kindly old
woman to come waddling over and save
me from these biting girls. But I’m
sorely mistaken.
    Instead of a wizened crone, I’m met
with a formidable woman made of steel
and shadow. Like Sonya, she has coffee-
colored skin and black hair, though hers
is shot with streaks of white. Despite her
age, her brown eyes spark with life.
    “Lady Mareena, this is my
grandmother Lady Ara, the head of
House Iral.” Sonya explains with a
pointed smirk. The older woman eyes
me, and her gaze is worse than any
camera, piercing straight through me.
“Perhaps you know her as the Panther?”
    “The Panther? I don’t—”
    But Sonya keeps talking, enjoying
watching me squirm. “Many years ago,
when the war slowed, intelligence
agents became more important than
soldiers. The Panther was the greatest of
them all.”
    A spy. I’m standing in front of a
spy.
    I force myself to smile, if only to try
and hide my fear. Sweat breaks out on
my palms, and I hope I don’t have to
shake any hands. “A pleasure to meet
you, my lady.”
    Ara simply nods. “I knew your
father, Mareena. And your mother.”
    “I miss them terribly,” I reply, saying
the words to placate her.
    But the Panther looks perplexed,
tipping her head to the side. For a
second, I can see thousands of secrets,
hard-won in the shadows of war,
reflecting in her eyes. “You remember
them?” she asks, prodding at my lie.
    My voice catches, but I have to keep
talking, keep lying. “I don’t, but I miss
having parents.” Mom and Dad flash in
my mind, but I push them away. My Red
past is the last thing I should think about.
“I wish they were here to help me
understand all this.”
    “Hmm,” she says, surveying me
again. Her suspicion makes me want to
leap off the balcony. “Your father had
blue eyes, as did your mother.”
    And my eyes are brown . “I am
different in many ways, most I don’t
even understand yet,” is all I can manage
to say, hoping that explanation will be
enough.
    For once, the queen’s voice is my
savior. “Shall we sit, ladies?” she says,
echoing over the crowd. It’s enough to
pull me away from Ara, Sonya, and the
quiet Elane, to a seat where I can
breathe a little sigh to myself.

Halfway to Lessons, I begin to feel calm
again. I addressed everyone properly
and only spoke as much as I had to, as
instructed. Evangeline talked enough for
both of us, regaling the women with her
“undying love” for Cal and the honor she
felt at being chosen. I thought the
Queenstrial girls would band together
and kill her, but they didn’t, to my
annoyance. Only the Iral grandmother
and Sonya seemed to even care that I
was there, though they didn’t push their
interrogation any further. But they
certainly will.
    When Maven appears around the
corner, I’m so proud of my survival at
lunch that I’m not even annoyed by his
presence. In fact, I feel strangely
relieved and let a bit of my cold act
drop. He grins, coming closer with a
few long strides.
    “Still alive?” he asks. Compared to
the Irals, he’s like a friendly puppy.
    I can’t help but smile. “You should
send Lady Iral back to the Lakelanders.
She’ll make them surrender in a week.”
    He forces a hollow laugh. “She’s a
battle-ax that one. Can’t seem to
understand she’s not in the war any
longer. Did she question you at all?”
     “More like interrogate. I think she’s
angry I beat out her granddaughter.”
     Fear flickers in his eyes, and I
understand it. If the Panther is sniffing
around my trail . . . “She shouldn’t
bother you like that,” he mutters. “I’ll let
my mother know, and she’ll take care of
it.”
     As much as I don’t want his help, I
don’t see any other way around it. A
woman like Ara could easily find the
cracks in my story, and then I’ll be truly
finished. “Thanks, that would—that
would be very helpful.”
     Maven’s dress uniform is gone,
replaced by casual clothes built for form
and function. It calms me a little, to see
at least someone looking so informal.
But I can’t let anything about him soothe
me . He’s one of them. I can’t forget
that.
    “Are you done for the day?” he says,
his face clearing to reveal an eager
smile. “I could show you around if you
want.”
    “No.” The word comes out quickly,
and his smile fades. His frown unsettles
me as much as his smile. “I have
Lessons next,” I add, hoping to soften the
blow. Why I care about his feelings, I
don’t exactly know. “Your mother loves
her schedules.”
    He nods, looking a little better. “She
does indeed. Well, I won’t keep you.”
     He takes my hand gently. The cold I
felt on his skin before is gone, replaced
with a delightful heat. Before I get a
chance to pull away, he leaves me
standing there alone.
     Lucas gives me a moment to collect
myself before noting, “You know, we’d
get there much faster if you actually
moved.”
     “Shut up, Lucas.”
             THIRTEEN

My next instructor waits for me in a
room cluttered from floor to ceiling with
more books than I’ve ever seen, more
books than I ever thought existed. They
look old and completely priceless.
Despite my aversion to school and
books of any kind, I feel a pull to them.
But the titles and pages are written in a
language I don’t understand, a jumble of
symbols I could never hope to decipher.
    Just as intriguing as the books are the
maps along the wall, of the kingdom and
other lands, old and new. Framed
against the far wall, behind a pane of
glass, is a vast, colorful map pieced
together from separate sheets of paper.
It’s at least twice as tall as me and
dominates the room. Faded and ripped,
it’s a tangled knot of red lines and blue
coasts, green forests and yellow cities.
This is the old world, the before world,
with old names and old borders we no
longer have any use for.
     “It’s strange to look at the world as
it once was,” the instructor says,
appearing out of the book stacks. His
yellow robes, stained and faded by age,
make him look like a human piece of
paper. “Can you find where we are?”
     The sheer size of the map makes me
gulp, but, like everything else, I’m sure
this is a test. “I can try.”
     Norta is the northeast. The Stilts is
on the Capital River, and the river goes
to the sea. After a minute of pained
searching, I finally find the river and the
inlet near my village. “There,” I say,
pointing just north, where I suppose
Summerton might be.
     He nods, happy to know I’m not a
total fool. “Do you recognize anything
else?”
     But like the books, the map is written
in the unknown language. “I can’t read
it.”
     “I didn’t ask if you could read it,” he
replies, still pleasant. “Besides, words
can lie. See beyond them.”
     With a shrug, I force myself to look
again. I was never a good student in
school, and this man is going to find that
out soon enough. But to my surprise, I
like this game. Searching the map,
looking for features I recognize. “That
might be Harbor Bay,” I finally murmur,
circling the area around a hooked cape.
    “Correct,” he says, his face folding
into a smile. The wrinkles around his
eyes deepen with the action, showing his
age. “This is Delphie now,” he adds,
pointing to a city farther south. “And
Archeon is here.”
    He puts his finger over the Capital
River, a few miles north of what looks
like the largest city on the map, in the
entire country of the before world. The
Ruins. I’ve heard the name, in whispers
between the older kids, and from my
brother     Shade. The Ash City, the
Wreckage, he called it. A tremor runs
down my spine at the thought of such a
place, still covered in smoke and
shadow from a war more than a thousand
years ago. Will this world ever be like
that, if our war doesn’t end?
    The instructor stands back to let me
think. He has a very strange idea of
teaching; it’ll probably end with a four-
hour game of me staring at a wall.
    But suddenly, I’m very aware of the
buzz in this room. Or lack thereof. This
entire day I’ve felt the electrical weight
of cameras, so much that I’ve stopped
noticing. Until now, when I don’t feel it
at all. It’s gone. I can feel the lights still
pulsing with electricity, but no cameras.
No eyes. Elara cannot see me here.
    “Why isn’t anyone watching us?”
    He only blinks at me. “So there is a
difference,” he mutters. What that means
I don’t know, and it infuriates me.
    “Why?”
    “Mare, I’m here to teach you your
histories, to teach you how to be Silver
and how to be, ah, useful,” he says, his
expression souring.
    I stare at him, confused. Cold fear
bleeds through me. “My name is
Mareena.”
    But he only waves a hand, brushing
aside my feeble declaration. “I’m also
going to try to understand exactly how
you came to be and how your abilities
work.”
     “My abilities came to be because—
because I’m a Silver. My parents’
abilities mixed—my father was an
oblivion and my mother a storm.” I
stutter through the explanation Elara fed
me, trying to make him understand. “I’m
a Silver, sir.”
     To my horror, he shakes his head.
“No you are not, Mare Barrow, and you
must never forget it.”
     He knows. I’m finished. It’s all
over. I should beg, plead for him to keep
my secret, but the words stick in my
throat. The end is coming, and I can’t
even open my mouth to stop it.
    “There’s no need for that,” he
continues, noting my fear. “I have no
plans of alerting anyone to your
heritage.”
    The relief I feel is short-lived,
shifting into another kind of fear. “Why?
What do you want from me?”
    “I am, above all things, a curious
man. And when you entered Queenstrial
a Red servant and ran out some long-lost
Silver lady, I have to say I was quite
curious.”
    “Is that why there aren’t any cameras
in here?” I bristle, backing away from
him. My fists clench, and I wish the
lightning would come to protect me from
this man. “So there’s no record of you
examining me?”
    “There are no cameras in here
because I have the power to turn them
off.”
    Hope sparks in me, like light in
absolute darkness. “What is your
power?” I ask shakily. Maybe he’s like
me.
    “Mare, when a Silver says ‘power,’
they mean might, strength. ‘Ability,’ on
the other hand, refers to all the silly little
things we can do.” Silly little things.
Like break a man in two or drown him in
the town square. “I mean that my sister
was queen once, and that still counts for
something around here.”
    “Lady Blonos didn’t teach me that.”
    He chuckles to himself. “That’s
because Lady Blonos is teaching you
nonsense. I will never do that.”
    “So, if the queen was your sister,
then you’re—”
    “Julian Jacos, at your service.” He
sweeps into a comically low bow.
“Head of House Jacos, heir to nothing
more than a few old books. My sister
was the late queen Coriane, and Prince
Tiberias the Seventh, Cal as we all call
him, is my nephew.”
    Now that he says it, I can see the
resemblance. Cal’s coloring is his
father’s, but the easy expression, the
warmth behind his eyes—those must
come from his mother.
    “So, you’re not going to turn me into
some science experiment for the queen?”
I ask, still wary.
    Instead of looking offended, Julian
laughs aloud. “My dear, the queen would
like nothing more than for you to
disappear. Discovering what you are,
helping you understand it, is the last
thing she wants.”
    “But you’re going to do it anyway?”
    Something flashes in his eyes,
something like anger. “The queen’s
reach is not so long as she wants you to
think. I want to know what you are, and
I’m sure you do too.”
    As afraid as I was a moment ago,
that’s how intrigued I am now. “I do.”
    “That’s what I thought,” he says,
smiling at me over a stack of books.
“I’m sorry to say I must also do what
was asked, to prepare you for the day
you step forward.”
     My face falls, remembering what Cal
explained in the throne room. You are
their champion. A Silver raised Red.
“They want to use me to stop a
rebellion. Somehow.”
     “Yes, my dear brother-in-law and
his queen believe you can do so, if used
appropriately.” Bitterness drips from his
every word.
     “It’s a stupid idea and impossible. I
won’t be able to do anything, and then . .
.” My voice trails away. Then they’ll
kill me.
     Julian follows my train of thought.
“You’re wrong, Mare. You don’t
understand the power you have now,
how much you could control.” He clasps
his hands behind his back, oddly tight.
“The Scarlet Guard are too drastic for
most, too much too fast. But you are the
controlled change, the kind people can
trust. You are the slow burn that will
quench a revolution with a few speeches
and smiles. You can speak to the Reds,
tell them how noble, how benevolent,
how right the king and his Silvers are.
You can talk your people back into their
chains. Even the Silvers who question
the king, the ones who have doubts, can
be convinced by you. And the world
will stay the same.”
    To my surprise, Julian seems
disheartened by this. Without the buzzing
cameras, I forget myself and my face
curls into a sneer. “And you don’t want
that? You’re a Silver, you should hate
the Scarlet Guard—and me.”
    “Thinking all Silvers are evil is just
as wrong as thinking all Reds are
inferior,” he says, his voice grave.
“What my people are doing to you and
yours is wrong to the deepest levels of
humanity. Oppressing you, trapping you
in an endless cycle of poverty and death,
just because we think you are different
from us? That is not right. And as any
student of history can tell you, it will end
poorly.”
    “But we are different.” One day in
this world taught me that. “We’re not
equal.”
    Julian stoops, his eyes boring into
mine. “I’m looking at proof you are
wrong.”
    You’re looking at a freak, Julian.
    “Will you let me prove you wrong,
Mare?”
    “What good will it do? Nothing will
change.”
    Julian sighs, exasperated. He runs a
hand through his thinning chestnut hair.
“For hundreds of years the Silvers have
walked the earth as living gods and the
Reds have been slaves at their feet, until
you. If that isn’t change, I don’t know
what is.”
    He can help me survive. Better yet,
he might even help me live.
   “So what do we do?”

My days take on a rhythm, always the
same schedule. Protocol in the morning,
Lessons in the afternoon, while Elara
parades me at lunches and dinners in
between. The Panther and Sonya still
seem wary of me but haven’t said
anything since the luncheon. Maven’s
help seems to have worked, as much as I
hate to admit it.
    At the next large gathering, this time
in the queen’s personal dining hall, the
Irals ignore me completely. Despite my
Protocol lessons, luncheon is still
overwhelming as I try to remember what
I’ve been taught. Osanos, nymphs, blue
and green. Welle, greenwardens, green
and gold. Lerolan, oblivions, orange
and red. Rhambos and Tyros and
Nornus and Iral and many more. How
anyone keeps track of this, I’ll never
know.
    As usual, I’m seated next to
Evangeline. I’m painfully aware of the
many metal utensils on the table, all
lethal weapons in Evangeline’s cruel
hand. Every time she lifts her knife to cut
her food, my body tenses, waiting for the
blow. Elara knows what I’m thinking, as
usual, but carries on through her meal
with a smile. That might be worse than
Evangeline’s torture, to know she takes
pleasure in watching our silent war.
    “And how do you like the Hall of the
Sun, Lady Titanos?” the girl across from
me asks—Atara, House Viper, green
and black. The animos who killed the
doves. “I assume it’s no comparison to
the—the village you lived in before.”
She says the word village like a curse,
and I don’t miss her smirk.
     The other women laugh with her, a
few whispering in scandalized voices.
     It takes me a minute to respond as I
try to keep my blood from boiling. “The
Hall and Summerton are very different
from what I’m used to,” I force out.
     “Obviously,” another woman says,
leaning forward to join the conversation.
A Welle, judging by her green-and-gold
tunic. “I took a tour of the Capital Valley
once, and I must say, the Red villages
are simply deplorable. They don’t even
have proper roads.”
    We can barely feed ourselves, let
alone pave streets. My jaw tightens until
I think my teeth might shatter. I try to
smile but instead end up grimacing as the
other women voice their agreement.
    “And the Reds, well, I suppose it’s
the best they can do with what they
have,” the Welle continues, wrinkling
her nose at the thought. “They’re suited
to such lives.”
    “It’s not our fault they were born to
serve,” a brown-robed Rhambos says
airily, as if she’s talking about the
weather or the food. “It’s simply
nature.”
    Anger curls through me, but one
glance from the queen tells me I cannot
act on it. Instead, I must do my duty. I
must lie. “It is indeed,” I hear myself
say. Under the table, my hands clench,
and I think my heart might be breaking.
    All over the table, the women listen
attentively. Many smile, more nod as I
reassert their terrible beliefs about my
people. Their faces make me want to
scream.
    “Of course,” I continue, unable to
stop myself. “Being forced to live such
lives, with no respite, no reprieve, and
no escape, would make servants of
anyone.”
    The few smiles fade, twitching into
bewilderment.
    “Lady Titanos is to have the best
tutors and best help to make sure she
adjusts properly,” Elara says quickly,
cutting me off. “She’s already begun
with Lady Blonos.”
    The women mutter appreciatively
while the girls exchange eye rolls. It’s
enough time to recover, to reclaim the
self-control I need to survive the meal.
    “What does His Royal Highness
intend to do about the rebels?” a woman
asks, her gruff voice sending a shock of
silence over lunch, drawing focus away
from me.
    Every eye at the table turns to the
speaker, a woman in military uniform. A
few other ladies wear uniforms as well,
but hers shines with the most medals and
ribbons. The ugly scar down her
freckled face says she may actually have
earned them. Here in a palace, it’s easy
to forget there’s a war going on, but the
haunted look in her eye says she will
not, she cannot, forget.
    Queen Elara puts down her spoon
with practiced grace and an equally
practiced smile. “Colonel Macanthos, I
would hardly call them rebels—”
    “And that’s only the attack they’ve
claimed,” the colonel fires back, cutting
off the queen. “What about the explosion
in Harbor Bay, or the airfield in Delphie
for that matter? Three airjets destroyed,
and two more stolen from one of our
own bases!”
    My eyes widen, and I can’t help but
gasp with a few ladies. More attacks?
But while the others look frightened,
hands pressed to their mouths, I have to
fight the urge to smile. Farley has been
busy.
    “Are you an engineer, Colonel?”
Elara’s voice is sharp, cold, and final.
She doesn’t give Macanthos a chance to
shake her head. “Then you wouldn’t
understand how a gas leak in the Bay
was at fault for the explosion. And
remind me, do you command aerial
troops? Oh no, I’m so sorry, your
specialty lies with ground forces. The
airfield incident was a training exercise
overseen by Lord General Laris himself.
He has personally assured His Highness
of the utmost safety of the Delphie base.”
    In a fair fight, Macanthos could
probably tear Elara apart with her bare
hands. But instead, Elara tore the
colonel apart with nothing but words.
And she’s not even finished. Julian’s
words echo in my head—words can lie.
    “Their goal is to harm innocent
civilians, Silver and Red, to incite fear
and hysteria. They are small, contained,
and cowardly, hiding from my husband’s
justice. To call every mishap and
misunderstanding in this kingdom the
work of such evil only furthers their
efforts to terrorize the rest of us. Do not
give these monsters the satisfaction of
that.”
    A few women at the table clap and
nod, agreeing with the queen’s sweeping
lie. Evangeline joins in, and the action
quickly spreads, until only the colonel
and I remain silent. I can tell she doesn’t
believe anything the queen says, but
there’s no way to call the queen a liar.
Not here, not in her arena.
    As much as I want to stay still, I
know I can’t. I’m Mareena, not Mare,
and I have to support my queen and her
wretched words. My hands come
together, clapping for Elara’s lie, as the
scolded colonel bows her head.

Even though I’m constantly surrounded
by servants and Silvers, loneliness sets
in. I don’t see Cal much, what with his
busy schedule of training, training, and
more training. He even gets to leave the
Hall, going to address troops at a nearby
base or accompanying his father on state
business. I suppose I could talk to
Maven, with his blue eyes and half
smirk, but I’m still wary of him. Luckily
we’re never truly left alone. It’s a silly
court tradition, to keep noble boys and
girls from being tempted, as Lady
Blonos put it, but I doubt it’ll ever apply
to me.
    Truthfully, half the time I forget I’m
supposed to marry him one day. The
idea of Maven being my husband doesn’t
seem real. We’re not even friends, let
alone partners. As nice as he is, my
instincts tell me not to turn my back on
Elara’s son, that he’s hiding something.
What that might be, I don’t know.
    Julian’s teachings make it all
bearable; the education I once dreaded
is now a bright spot in my sea of
darkness. Without the cameras and
Elara’s eyes, we can spend our time
discovering what I really am. But the
going is slow, frustrating us both.
    “I think I know what your problem
is,” Julian says at the end of my first
week. I’m standing a few yards away,
arms outstretched, looking like the usual
fool. There’s a strange electrical
contraption at my feet, occasionally
spitting sparks. Julian wants me to
harness it, to use it, but once again, I’ve
failed to produce the lightning that got
me into this mess in the first place.
    “Maybe I have to be in mortal
danger,” I huff. “Should we ask for
Lucas’s gun?”
    Usually Julian laughs at my jokes,
but right now he’s too busy thinking.
    “You’re like a child,” he finally
says. I wrinkle my nose at the insult, but
he continues anyway. “This is how
children are at first, when they can’t
control themselves. Their abilities
present in times of stress or fear, until
they learn to harness those emotions and
use them to their advantage. There’s a
trigger, and you need to find yours.”
    I remember how I felt in the Spiral
Garden, falling to what I thought was my
doom. But it wasn’t fear running through
my veins as I collided with the lightning
shield—it was peace. It was knowing
that my end had come and accepting
there was nothing I could do to stop it—
it was letting go.
    “It’s worth a try, at least,” Julian
prods.
    With a groan, I face the wall again.
Julian lined it with some stone
bookshelves, all empty of course, so I
have something to aim at. Out of the
corner of my eye, I see him back away,
watching me all the time.
    Let go. Let yourself go, the voice in
my head whispers. My eyes slide closed
as I focus, letting my thoughts fall away
so that my mind can reach out, feeling
for the electricity it craves to touch. The
ripple of energy, alive beneath my skin,
moves over me again until it sings in
every muscle and nerve. That’s usually
where it stops, just on the edge of
feeling, but not this time. Instead of
trying to hold on, to push myself into this
force, I let go. And I fall into what I
can’t explain, into a sensation that is
everything and nothing, light and dark,
hot and cold, alive and dead. Soon the
power is the only thing in my head,
blotting out all my ghosts and memories.
Even Julian and the books cease to exist.
My mind is clear, a black void humming
with force. Now when I push at the
sensation, it doesn’t disappear and it
moves within me, from my eyes to the
tips of my fingers. To my left, Julian
gasps aloud.
    My eyes open to see purple-white
sparks jumping from the contraption to
my fingers, like electricity between
wires.
    For once, Julian has nothing to say.
And neither do I.
    I don’t want to move, afraid that any
small change might make the lightning
disappear. But it doesn’t fade. It
remains, jumping and twisting in my
hand like a kitten with a ball of yarn. It
seems just as harmless, but I remember
what I almost did to Evangeline. This
power can destroy if I let it.
    “Try to move it,” Julian breathes,
watching me with wide, excited eyes.
    Something tells me this lightning will
obey my wishes. It’s part of me, a piece
of my soul alive in the world.
    My fist clenches into a tight ball, and
the sparks react to my straining muscles,
becoming larger and brighter and faster.
They eat away at the sleeve of my shirt,
burning through the fabric in seconds.
Like a child throwing a ball, I whip my
arm toward the stone shelves, releasing
my fist at the last moment. The lightning
flies through the air in a circle of bright
sparks, colliding with the bookshelves.
    The      resulting boom makes me
scream and fall back into a stack of
books. As I tumble to the ground, heart
racing in my chest, the solid stone
bookshelf collapses on itself in a cloud
of thick dust. Sparks flash over the
rubble     for    a   moment      before
disappearing, leaving nothing but ruins
behind.
    “Sorry about the shelf,” I say from
beneath a pile of fallen books. My
sleeve still smokes in a ruin of thread,
but it’s nothing compared to the buzz in
my hand. My nerves sing, tingling with
power—that felt good.
    Julian’s shadow moves through the
cloudy air, a laugh resounding deep in
his chest as he examines my handiwork.
His white grin glows through the dust.
    “We’re going to need a bigger
classroom.”

He’s not wrong. We’re forced to find
newer and bigger rooms to practice in
each day, until we finally find a spot in
the underground levels a week later.
Here the walls are metal and concrete,
stronger than the decorative stone and
wood of the upper floors. My aim is
dismal to say the least, and Julian is very
careful to steer clear of my practicing,
but it becomes easier and easier for me
to call up the lightning.
     Julian takes notes the whole time,
jotting down everything from my
heartbeat to the heat of a recently
electrified cup. Each new note brings
another puzzled but happy smile to his
face, though he doesn’t tell me why. I
doubt I’d understand even if he did.
    “Fascinating,” he murmurs, reading
something off another metal contraption I
can’t name. He says it measures
electrical energy, but how I don’t know.
    I brush my hands together, watching
them “power down,” as Julian calls it.
My sleeves remain intact this time,
thanks to my new clothing. It’s fireproof
fabric, like what Cal and Maven wear,
though I suppose mine should be called
shockproof. “What’s fascinating?”
    He hesitates, like he doesn’t want to
tell me, like he shouldn’t tell me, but
finally shrugs. “Before you powered up
and fried that poor statue”—he gestures
to the smoking pile of rubble that was
once a bust of some king—“I measured
the amount of electricity in this room.
From the lights, the wiring, that sort of
thing. And now I just measured you.”
    “And?”
    “You gave off twice what I recorded
before,” he says proudly, but I don’t see
why it matters at all. With a quick dip,
he switches off the spark box, as I’ve
taken to calling it. I can feel the
electricity in it die away. “Try again.”
    Huffing, I focus again. After a
moment of concentration, my sparks
return, just as strong as before. But this
time they come from within me.
    Julian’s grin splits his face from ear
to ear.
    “So . . . ?”
    “So this confirms my suspicions.”
Sometimes I forget Julian is a scholar
and a scientist. But he’s always quick to
remind me. “You produced electrical
energy.”
    Now I’m really confused. “Right.
That’s my ability, Julian.”
    “No, I thought your ability was the
power to manipulate, not create,” he
says, his voice dropping gravely. “No
one can create, Mare.”
    “But that doesn’t make sense. The
nymphs—”
    “Manipulate water that already
exists. They can’t use what isn’t there.”
    “Well, what about Cal? Maven? I
don’t see many raging infernos around
for them to play with.”
    Julian smiles, shaking his head.
“You’ve seen their bracelets, yes?”
    “They always wear them.”
    “The bracelets make sparks, little
tiny flames for the boys to control.
Without something to start the fire, they
are powerless. All elementals are the
same, manipulating metal or water or
plant life that already exists. They’re
only as strong as their surroundings. Not
like you, Mare.”
    Not like me. I’m not like anyone.
“So what does this mean?”
    “I’m not quite sure. You are
something else entirely. Not Red, not
Silver. Something else. Something
more.”
    “Something different.” I expected
Julian’s tests to bring me closer to some
kind of answer, but instead they only
raise more questions. “What am I,
Julian? What’s wrong with me?”
    Suddenly it’s very difficult to
breathe, and my eyes swim. I have to
blink back hot tears, trying to hide them
from Julian. It’s all catching up to me, I
think. Lessons, Protocol, this place
where I can’t trust anyone, where I’m not
even myself. It’s suffocating. I want to
scream, but I know I can’t.
    “There’s nothing wrong with being
different,” I hear Julian say, but the
words are just an echo. My own
thoughts, memories of home, of Gisa and
Kilorn, drown him out.
    “Mare?” He takes a step toward me,
his face a picture of kindness—but he
keeps me at an arm’s length. Not for my
sake—his own. To protect himself from
me. With a gasp, I realize the sparks
have returned, running up my forearms
now, threatening to engulf me in a raging
bright storm. “Mare, focus on me. Mare,
control it.”
    He speaks softly, calmly, but with
steady force. He even looks frightened
of me.
    “Control, Mare.”
    But I can’t control anything. Not my
future, not my thoughts, not even this
ability that is the root of all my troubles.
    There is one thing I can still control
though, for now, at least. My feet.
    Like the wretched coward that I am,
I run.
    The halls are empty as I tear through
them, but the invisible weight of a
thousand cameras presses down on me. I
don’t have much time until Lucas or,
worse, the Sentinels, find me. I just need
to breathe. I just need to see the sky
above me, not glass.
    I’m standing on the balcony a full ten
seconds before I realize it’s raining,
washing me clean of my boiling anger.
The sparks are gone, replaced by fierce,
ugly tears that track down my face.
Thunder rumbles somewhere far off, and
the air is warm. But the humid
temperature is gone. The heat has
broken, and summer will soon be over.
Time is passing. My life is moving on,
no matter how much I want it to stay the
same.
    When a strong hand closes around
my arm, I almost scream. Two Sentinels
stand over me, their eyes dark behind
their masks. Both are twice my size and
heartless, trying to drag me back into my
prison.
    “My lady,” one of them growls, but
it doesn’t sound respectful at all.
    “Let me go.” The command is weak,
almost a whisper. I gulp down air like
I’m drowning. “Just give me a few
minutes, please—”
    But I’m not their master. They don’t
answer to me. No one does.
    “You heard my bride,” another voice
says. His words are firm and hard, the
voice of royalty. Maven. “Let her go.”
    When the prince steps out onto the
balcony, I can’t help but feel a rush of
relief. The Sentinels straighten at his
presence, both inclining their heads in
his direction. The one holding me speaks
up. “We must keep the Lady Titanos to
her schedule,” he says, but he loosens
his grip. “It’s orders, sir.”
    “Then you have new orders,” Maven
replies, his voice like ice. “I will
accompany Mareena back to her
lessons.”
    “Very well, sir,” the Sentinels say in
unison, unable to refuse a prince.
    When they stomp away, their flaming
cloaks dripping rain, I sigh out loud. I
didn’t realize it before, but my hands are
shaking, and I have to clench my fists to
hide the tremors. But Maven is nothing if
not polite and pretends not to notice.
    “We have working showers inside,
you know.”
    My hands wipe at my eyes, though
my tears are long lost in the rain, leaving
behind only an embarrassingly runny
nose and some black makeup.
Thankfully, my silver powder holds. It’s
made of stronger stuff than I am.
    “First rain of the season,” I manage,
forcing myself to sound normal. “Had to
see it for myself.”
    “Right,” he says, moving to stand
next to me. I turn my head, hoping to hide
my face for just a little bit longer. “I
understand, you know.”
    Do you, Prince? Do you understand
what it’s like to be taken away from
everything you love, forced to be
something else? To lie every minute of
every day for the rest of your life? To
know there’s something wrong with
you?
    I don’t have the strength to deal with
his knowing smiles. “You can stop
pretending to know anything about me or
my feelings.”
    His expression sours at my tone, his
mouth twisting into a grimace. “You
think I don’t know how difficult it is to
be here? With these people?” He casts a
glance over his shoulder like he’s
worried someone might hear. But there’s
no one listening except the rain and
thunder. “I can’t say what I want, do
what I want—with my mother around I
can barely even think what I want. And
my brother—!”
    “What about your brother?”
    The words stick in his mouth. He
doesn’t want to say them, but he feels
them all the same. “He’s strong, he’s
talented, he’s powerful—and I’m his
shadow. The shadow of the flame.”
    Slowly, he exhales, and I realize the
air around us is strangely hot. “Sorry,”
he adds, taking a step away, letting the
air cool. Before my eyes, he melts back
into the Silver prince more suited to
banquets and dress uniforms. “I
shouldn’t have said that.”
    “It’s fine,” I murmur. “It’s nice to
hear that I’m not completely alone in
feeling out of place.”
    “That’s something you should know
about us Silvers. We’re always alone. In
here, and here,” he says, pointing
between his head and his heart. “It keeps
you strong.”
    Lightning       cracks       overhead,
illuminating his blue eyes until they seem
to glow. “That’s just stupid,” I tell him,
and he chuckles darkly.
    “You better hide that heart of yours,
Lady Titanos. It won’t lead you
anywhere you want to go.”
    The words make me shiver. Finally I
remember the rain and the mess I must
look like. “I should get back to my
lessons,” I mutter, fully intending to
leave him on the balcony. Instead, he
catches my arm.
    “I think I can help you with your
problem.”
    I quirk an eyebrow at him. “What
problem?”
    “You don’t seem like the type of girl
to weep at the drop of a hat. You’re
homesick.” He holds up a hand before I
can protest. “I can fix that.”
           FOURTEEN

Security patrols my hallway in roving
pairs, but with Maven on my arm, they
don’t stop me. Even though it’s night,
long past when I should be in bed, no
one says a word. No one crosses a
prince. Where he’s leading now, I don’t
know, but he promised to get me there.
Home.
    He’s quiet but determined, fighting a
small smile. I can’t help but beam at
hi m. Maybe he isn’t so bad . But he
stops us long before I assume he should
—we never even leave the residence
floors.
    “Here we are,” he says, and raps on
the door.
    It swings open after a moment,
revealing Cal. His appearance takes me
back a step. His chest is bare, while the
rest of his strange armor hangs off him.
Metal plates woven into fabric, some of
it dented. I don’t miss the purple bruise
above his heart, or the faint stubble on
his cheeks. It’s the first time I’ve seen
him in over a week, and I’ve caught him
at a bad moment, obviously. He doesn’t
notice me at first; he’s focused on
removing more of his armor. It makes me
gulp.
    “Got the board set, Mavey—,” he
begins, but stops when he looks up to
see me standing with his brother. “Mare,
how can I, uh, what can I do for you?”
He stumbles over his words, at a loss
for once.
    “I’m not exactly sure,” I reply,
looking from him to Maven. My
betrothed only smirks, raising an
eyebrow a little.
    “For being the good son, my brother
has his own discretions,” he says, and
his air is surprisingly playful. Even Cal
grins a little, rolling his eyes. “You
wanted to go home, Mare, and I’ve
found you someone who’s been there
before.”
    After a second of confusion, I realize
what Maven is saying and how stupid I
am for not realizing it before. Cal can
get me out of the palace. Cal was at the
tavern. . . . He got himself out of here,
so he can do the same for me.
    “Maven,” Cal says through gritted
teeth, his grin gone. “You know she
can’t. It’s not a good idea—”
    It’s my turn to speak up, to take what
I want. “Liar.”
    He looks at me with his burning
eyes, his stare going right through me. I
hope he can see my determination, my
desperation, my need.
    “We’ve taken everything from her,
brother,” Maven murmurs, drawing
close. “Surely we can give her this?”
    And then slowly, reluctantly, Cal
nods and waves me into his room. Dizzy
with excitement, I hurry inside, almost
hopping from foot to foot.
    I’m going home.
    Maven lingers at the door, his smile
fading a little when I leave his side.
“You’re not coming.” It isn’t a question.
    He shakes his head. “You’ll have
enough to worry about without me
tagging along.”
    I don’t have to be a genius to see the
truth in his words. But just because he
isn’t coming doesn’t mean I will forget
what he’s done for me already. Without
thinking, I throw my arms around Maven.
He doesn’t respond for a second but
slowly lets an arm drop around my
shoulders. When I pull back, a silver
blush paints his cheeks. I can feel my
own blood run hot beneath my skin,
pounding in my ears.
    “Don’t be too long,” he says, tearing
his eyes away from me to look at Cal.
    Cal barely smirks. “You act like I’ve
never done this before.”
    The brothers share a chuckle,
laughing just for each other like I’ve
seen my brothers do a thousand times
before. When the door shuts behind
Maven, leaving me with Cal, I can’t help
but feel a little less animosity toward the
princes.
    Cal’s room is twice the size of mine
but so cluttered it seems smaller. Armor
and uniforms and combat suits fill the
alcoves along the walls, all hanging
from what I assume are models of Cal’s
body. They tower over me like faceless
ghosts, staring with invisible eyes. Most
of the armor is light, steel plate and thick
fabric, but a few are heavy-duty, meant
for battle, not training. One even has a
helmet of shining metal, with a tinted
glass faceplate. An insignia glitters on
the sleeve, sewn into the dark gray
material. The flaming black crown and
silver wings. What it means, what the
uniforms are for, what Cal has done in
them, I don’t want to think about.
    Like Julian, Cal has stacks of books
piled all over, spilling out in little rivers
of ink and paper. They aren’t as old as
Julian’s though—most look newly
bound, typed out and reprinted on
plastic-lined sheets to preserve the
words. And all are written in Common,
the language of Norta, the Lakelands,
and Piedmont. While Cal disappears
into his closet, stripping off the rest of
his armor as he goes, I sneak a glance at
his books. These are strange, full of
maps, diagrams, and charts—guides to
the terrible art of warfare. Each one is
more violent than the last, detailing
military movements from recent years
and even before. Great victories, bloody
defeats, weapons, and maneuvers, it’s
enough to make my head spin. Cal’s
notes inside them are worse, outlining
the tactics he favors, which ones are
worth the cost of life. In the pictures,
tiny squares represent soldiers, but I see
my brothers and Kilorn and everyone
like them.
    Beyond the books, by the window,
there’s a little table and two chairs. On
the tabletop, a game board lies ready,
pieces already in place. I don’t
recognize it, but I know it was meant for
Maven. They must meet nightly, to play
and laugh as brothers do.
    “We won’t have very long to visit,”
Cal calls out, making me jump. I glance
at the closet, catching sight of his tall,
muscled back as he pulls a shirt on.
There are more bruises, and scars as
well, even though I’m sure he has access
to an army of healers if he wants them.
For some reason, he’s chosen to keep the
scars.
    “As long as I get to see my family,” I
answer back, maneuvering myself away
so I don’t keep staring at him.
    Cal emerges, this time fully dressed
in plain clothes. After a moment, I
realize it’s the same thing he wore the
night I met him. I can’t believe I didn’t
see him for what he was from the
beginning: a wolf in sheep’s clothing.
And now I’m the sheep pretending to be
a wolf.

We leave the residence floors quickly,
moving downward. Eventually, Cal turns
a corner, directing us into a wide
concrete room. “Just in here.”
   It looks like some kind of storage
facility, filled with rows of strange
shapes covered in canvas sheets. Some
are big, some are small, but all are
hidden.
    “It’s a dead end,” I protest. There’s
no way out but to go the way we came
in.
    “Yes, Mare, I brought you to a dead
end,” he sighs, walking down a
particular row. The sheets ripple as he
passes, and I glimpse shining metal
underneath.
    “More armor?” I poke at one of the
shapes. “I was going to say, you should
probably get some more. Didn’t seem
like you had enough upstairs. Actually,
you might want to put some on. My
brothers are pretty huge and like to beat
on people.” Though, judging by Cal’s
book collection and muscles, he can
hold his own. Not to mention the whole
controlling-fire thing.
    He just shakes his head. “I think I’ll
be fine without it. Besides, I look like a
Security officer in that stuff. We don’t
want your family getting the wrong idea,
do we?”
    “What idea do we want them to get?
I don’t think I’m exactly allowed to
introduce you properly.”
    “I work with you, we got a leave
pass for the night. Simple,” he says,
shrugging. Lying comes so easily to
these people.
    “So why would you come with me?
What’s the story there?”
     With a sly grin, Cal gestures to the
canvas shape next to him. “I’m your
ride.”
     He throws back the sheet, revealing
a gleaming contraption of metal and
black paint. Two treaded wheels,
mirrored chrome, lights, a long leather
seat—it’s a transport like I’ve never
seen.
     “It’s a cycle,” Cal says, running a
hand over the silver handlebars like a
proud father. He knows and loves every
inch of the metal beast. “Fast, agile, and
it can go where transports can’t.”
     “It looks—like a death trap,” I
finally say, unable to mask my
trepidation.
    Laughing, he pulls a helmet from the
back of the seat. I sure hope he doesn’t
expect me to wear it, much less ride this
thing. “That’s what Father said, and
Colonel Macanthos. They won’t mass-
produce for the armies yet, but I’ll win
them over. Haven’t crashed once since I
perfected the wheels.”
    “You built it?” I say, incredulous, but
he shrugs like it’s nothing. “Wow.”
    “Just wait until you ride it,” he says,
holding out the helmet to me. As if on
cue, the far wall jolts, its metal
mechanisms groaning somewhere, and
begins to slide away, revealing the dark
night beyond.
    Laughing, I take a step back from the
death machine. “That’s not happening.”
    But Cal just smirks and swings one
leg over the cycle, sinking down into the
seat. The engine rumbles to life beneath
him, purring and growling with energy. I
can sense the battery deep in the
machine, powering it on. It begs to be let
loose, to consume the long road between
here and home. Home.
    “It’s perfectly safe, I promise,” he
shouts over the engine. The headlight
blazes on, illuminating the dark night
beyond. Cal’s red-gold eyes meet mine
and he stretches out a hand. “Mare?”
    Despite the horrible sinking in my
stomach, I slide the helmet onto my head.

I’ve never ridden in an airship, but I
know this must feel like flying. Like
freedom. Cal’s cycle eats up the familiar
road in elegant, arcing curves. He’s a
good driver, I’ll give him that. The old
road is full of bumps and holes, but he
dodges each one with ease, even as my
heart rises in my throat. Only when we
coast to a stop half a mile from town do
I realize I’m holding on to him so tightly
he has to pry me off. I feel suddenly cold
without his warmth, but I push the
thought away.
    “Fun, right?” he says, powering
down the cycle. My legs and back are
already sore from the strange, small seat,
but he hops off with an extra spring in
his step.
    With some difficulty, I slide off as
well. My knees wobble a bit, more from
the pounding heartbeat still thrumming in
my ears, but I think I’m okay.
    “It won’t be my first choice in
transportation.”
    “Remind me to take you up in an
airjet sometime. You’ll stick to cycles
after that,” he replies as he rolls the
cycle off the road, into the cover of the
woods. After throwing a few leafy
branches over it, he stands back to
admire his handiwork. If I didn’t know
exactly where to look, I wouldn’t notice
the cycle was there at all.
    “You do this a lot, I see.”
    Cal turns back to me, one hand in his
pocket. “Palaces can get . . . stuffy.”
    “And crowded bars, Red bars,
aren’t?” I ask, pushing the topic. But he
starts walking toward the village, setting
a fast pace like he can outrun the
question.
    “I don’t go out to drink, Mare.”
    “So, what, you just catch
pickpockets and hand out jobs willy-
nilly?”
    When he stops short and whirls
around, I knock into his chest, feeling for
a moment the solid weight behind his
frame. Then I realize he’s laughing
deeply.
    “Did you just say willy-nilly?” he
says between chuckles.
    My face blushes red beneath my
makeup, and I give him a little shove.
Very inappropriate , my mind chides.
“Just answer the question.”
    His smile remains, though the
laughter fades away. “I don’t do this for
myself,” he says. “You have to
understand, Mare. I don’t—I’m going to
be king one day. I don’t have the luxury
of being selfish.”
    “I’d think the king would be the only
person with that luxury.”
    He shakes his head, his eyes forlorn
as they run over me. “I wish that were
true.”
    Cal’s fist clenches open and closed,
and I can almost see the flames on his
skin, hot and rising with his anger. But it
passes, leaving only an ember of regret
in his eyes. When he finally starts
walking again, it’s at a more forgiving
pace.
    “A king should know his people.
That’s why I sneak out,” he murmurs. “I
do it in the capital too, and at the war
front. I like to see how things really are
in the kingdom, instead of being told by
advisers and diplomats. That’s what a
good king would do.”
    He acts like he should be ashamed
for wanting to be a good leader. Maybe,
in the eyes of his father and all those
other fools, that’s the way it should be.
Strength and power are the words Cal
has been raised to know. Not goodness.
Not kindness. Not empathy or bravery or
equality or anything else that a ruler
should strive for.
    “And what do you see, Cal?” I ask,
gesturing toward the village coming into
view between the trees. My heart jumps
in my chest, knowing I’m so close.
    “I see a world on the edge of a
blade. Without balance, it will fall,” he
sighs, knowing it’s not the answer I want
to hear. “You don’t know how
precarious things are, how close this
world is to falling back into ruin. My
father does everything he can to keep us
all safe, and so will I.”
    “My world is already in ruin,” I say,
kicking at the dirt road beneath us. All
around us, the trees seem to open,
revealing the muddy place I call home.
Compared to the Hall, it must look like a
slum, like a hell. Why can’t he see that?
“Your father keeps your people safe, not
mine.”
    “Changing the world has costs,
Mare,” he says. “Many would die, Reds
most of all. And in the end, there
wouldn’t be victory, not for you. You
don’t know the bigger picture.”
    “So tell me.” I bristle, hating his
words. “Show me the bigger picture.”
    “The Lakelands, they’re like us, a
monarchy, nobles, a Silver elite to rule
the rest. And the Piedmont princes, our
own allies, would never back a nation
where Reds are equal. Prairie and
Tiraxes are the same. Even if Norta
changed, the rest of the continent would
not let it last. We would be invaded,
divided, torn apart. More war, more
death.”
    I remember Julian’s map, the breadth
of the greater world beyond our country.
All controlled by Silvers with nowhere
for us to turn. “What if you’re wrong?
What if Norta is the beginning? The
change the others need? You don’t know
where freedom leads.”
    Cal has no answer for that, and we
fall into bitter silence. “This is it,” I
mutter, stopping under the familiar
outline of my house.
    My feet are silent on the porch, a far
cry from Cal’s heavy, stomping steps
that make the wood beams creak. His
familiar heat rolls off him, and for a split
second I imagine him sending the house
up in flames. He senses my unease and
puts a warm hand on my shoulder, but
that does nothing to settle me.
    “I can wait below if you want,” he
whispers, taking me by surprise. “We
don’t want to chance them recognizing
me.”
    “They won’t. Even though my
brothers served, they probably wouldn’t
know you from a bedpost.” Shade
would, I thought, but Shade is smart
enough to keep his mouth shut.
“Besides, you said you want to know
what’s not worth fighting for.”
    With that I pull open the door,
stepping through to the home that is no
longer my own. It feels like taking a step
back in time.
    The house ripples with a chorus of
snores, not just from my father but from
the lumpy shape in the sitting area as
well. Bree slumps in the overstuffed
chair, a pile of muscle and thin blankets.
His dark hair is still closely shaved in
the army style, and there are scars on his
arms and face, testaments to his time
fighting. He must’ve lost a bet with
Tramy, who tosses and turns up in my
cot. Shade is nowhere to be seen, but
he’s never been one for sleep. Probably
out prowling the village, looking up old
girlfriends.
    “Rise and shine.” I laugh, ripping the
blanket off Bree in a smooth motion.
    He crashes to the floor, probably
hurting the floor more than himself, and
rolls to a stop at my feet. For half a
second, it looks like he might fall back
asleep.
    Then he blinks at me, bleary-eyed
and confused. In short, his usual self.
“Mare?”
    “Shut your face, Bree, people are
trying to sleep!” Tramy groans in the
dark.
    “ALL OF YOU, QUIET!” Dad roars
from his bedroom, making us all jump.
    I never realized how much I missed
this. Bree blinks the sleep from his eyes
and hugs me to him, laughing deep in his
chest. A nearby thunk announces Tramy
as he jumps from the upper loft, landing
beside us on nimble feet.
    “It’s Mare!” he shouts, pulling me up
from the floor and into his arms. He’s
thinner than Bree but not the weedy
string bean I remember. There are hard
knots of muscle under my hands; the last
few years have not been easy for him.
    “Good to see you, Tramy,” I breathe
against him, feeling like I might burst.
    The bedroom door bangs open,
revealing Mom in a tattered bathrobe.
She opens her mouth to scold the boys,
but the sight of me kills her words.
Instead, she smiles and claps her hands
together. “Oh, you’ve finally come to
visit!”
    Dad follows her, wheezing and
wheeling his chair into the main room.
Gisa is the last to wake up, but she only
pokes her head out over the loft ledge,
looking down.
    Tramy finally lets me go, putting me
back down next to Cal, who’s doing a
wonderful job looking awkward and out
of place.
    “Heard you caved and got a job,”
Tramy teases, poking me in the ribs.
    Bree chuckles, ruffling my hair. “The
army wouldn’t want her anyway, she’d
rob her legion blind.”
    I shove him with a smile. “Seems the
army doesn’t want you either.
Discharged, eh?”
     Dad answers for them, wheeling
forward. “Some lottery, the letter said.
Won an honorable discharge for the
Barrow boys. Full pension too.” I can
tell he doesn’t believe a word of it, but
Dad doesn’t press the subject. Mom, on
the other hand, eats it right up.
     “Brilliant, isn’t it? The government
finally doing something for us,” she says,
kissing Bree on the cheek. “And now
you, with a job.” The pride radiates off
her like I’ve never seen—usually she
saves all of it for Gisa. She’s proud of a
lie. “It’s about time this family came into
some luck.”
     Up above us, Gisa scoffs. I don’t
blame her. My luck broke her hand and
her future. “Yes, we’re very lucky,” she
huffs, finally moving to join us.
     Her going is slow, moving down the
ladder with one hand. When she reaches
the floor, I can see her splint is wrapped
in colored cloth. With a pang of sadness,
I realize it’s a piece of her beautiful
embroidery that will never be finished.
     I reach out to hug her, but she pulls
away, her eyes on Cal. She seems to be
the only one to notice him. “Who’s
that?”
     Flushing, I realize I’ve almost
forgotten him completely. “Oh, this is
Cal. He’s another servant up at the Hall
with me.”
     “Hi,” he manages, giving a stupid,
little wave.
    Mom giggles like a schoolgirl and
waves back, her gaze lingering on his
muscled arms. But Dad and my brothers
aren’t so charmed.
    “You’re not from these parts,” Dad
growls, staring at Cal like he’s some
kind of bug. “I can smell it on you.”
    “That’s just the Hall, Dad—,” I
protest, but Cal cuts me off.
    “I’m from Harbor Bay,” he says,
making sure to drop his r’s in the usual
Harbor accent. “I started serving at
Ocean Hill, the royal residence out
there, and now I travel with the pack
when they move.” He glances at me
sideways, a knowing look in his eye. “A
lot of the servants do that.”
    Mom draws a rattled breath and
reaches for my arm. “Will you? Do you
have to go with those people when they
leave?”
    I want to tell them that I didn’t
choose this, that I’m not walking away
willingly. But I have to lie, for their
sake. “It was the only position they had.
Besides, it’s good money.”
    “I think I’ve got a pretty good idea
what’s going on,” Bree growls, face-to-
face with Cal. To his credit, Cal barely
bats an eye at him.
    “Nothing’s going on,” he says
coolly, meeting Bree’s glare with equal
fire in his eyes. “Mare chose to work for
the palace. She signed a contract for a
year of service, and that’s it.”
    With a grunt, Bree backs away. “I
liked the Warren boy better,” he
grumbles.
    “Stop being a child, Bree,” I snap.
My mom flinches at my harsh voice, like
she’s forgotten what I sound like after
only three weeks. Strangely, her eyes
swim with tears. She’s forgetting you .
That’s why she wants you to stay. So
she doesn’t forget.
    “Mom, don’t cry,” I say, stepping
forward to hug her. She feels so thin in
my arms, thinner than I remember. Or
maybe I just never noticed how frail
she’s become.
    “It’s not just you, dear, it’s—” She
looks away from me, to Dad. There’s a
pain in her eyes, a pain I don’t
understand. The others can’t bear to look
at her. Even Dad stares at his useless
feet. A grim weight settles on the house.
    And then I realize what’s going on,
what they’re trying to protect me from.
    My voice shakes when I speak,
asking a question I don’t want to know
the answer to. “Where’s Shade?”
    Mom crumples in on herself, barely
making it to a chair at the kitchen table
before she devolves into sobs. Bree and
Tramy can’t bear to watch, both turning
away. Gisa doesn’t move, staring at the
floor like she wants to drown in it. No
one speaks, leaving only the sound of my
mother’s tears and my father’s labored
breathing to fill the hole my brother once
occupi ed. My brother, my closest
brother.
     I fall backward, almost missing a
step in my anguish, but Cal steadies me.
I wish he wouldn’t. I want to fall down,
to feel something hard and real so the
pain in my head won’t hurt so badly. My
hand strays to my ear, grazing over the
three stones I hold so dearly. The third,
Shade’s stone, feels cold against my
skin.
     “We didn’t want to tell you in a
letter,” Gisa whispers, picking at her
splint. “He died before the discharge
came.”
     The urge to electrify something, to
pour my rage and sorrow into a single
bolt of biting power, has never felt so
strong. Control it, I tell myself. I can’t
believe I was worried about Cal burning
the house down; lightning can destroy
as easily as flame.
    Gisa fights tears, forcing herself to
say the words. “He tried to run away. He
was executed. Beheaded.”
    My legs give way so quickly even
Cal doesn’t have a chance to catch me. I
can’t hear, I can’t see, I can only feel.
Sorrow, shock, pain, the whole world
spinning around me. The lightbulbs buzz
with electricity, screaming at me so
loudly I think my head might split. The
fridge crackles in the corner, its old,
bleeding battery pulsing like a dying
heart. They taunt me, tease me, trying to
make me crack. But I won’t. I won’t.
    “Mare,” Cal breathes in my ear, his
arms warm around me, but he might as
well be talking to me from across an
ocean. “Mare!”
    I heave a painful gasp, trying to catch
my breath. My cheeks feel wet, though I
don’t remember crying. Executed. My
blood boils under my skin. It’s a lie. He
didn’t run. He was in the Guard. And
they found out. They killed him for it.
They murdered him.
    I have never known anger like this.
Not when the boys left, not when Kilorn
came to me. Not even when they broke
Gisa’s hand.
    An earsplitting whine screeches
through the house, as the fridge, the
lightbulbs, and the wiring in the walls
kick into high gear. Electricity hums,
making me feel alive and angry and
dangerous. Now I’m creating the energy,
pushing my own strength through the
house just like Julian taught me.
    Cal yells, shaking me, trying to get
through somehow. But he can’t. The
power is in me and I don’t want to let
go. It feels better than pain.
    Glass rains down on us as the
lightbulbs explode, popping like corn in
a skillet. Pop pop pop. It almost drowns
out Mom’s scream.
    Someone pulls me to my feet with
rough strength. Their hands go to my
face, holding me still as they speak. Not
to comfort me, not to empathize, but to
snap me out of it. I would know that
voice anywhere.
    “Mare, pull yourself together!”
    I look up to see clear green eyes and
a face full of worry.
    “Kilorn.”
    “Knew       you’d    stumble     back
eventually,” he mumbles. “Kept an eye
out.”
    His hands are rough against my skin,
but calming. He brings me back to
reality, to a world where my brother is
dead. The last surviving lightbulb
swings above us, barely illuminating the
room and my stunned family.
    But that’s not the only thing lighting
up the darkness.
    Purple-white sparks dance around
my hands, growing weaker by the
moment, but plain as day. My lightning. I
won’t be able to lie my way out of this
one.
    Kilorn pulls me to a chair, his face a
storm cloud of confusion. The others
only stare, and with a pang of sadness, I
realize they’re afraid. But Kilorn isn’t
afraid at all—he’s angry.
    “What did they do to you?” he
rumbles, his hands inches from mine.
The sparks fade away entirely, leaving
just skin and shaking fingers.
    “They didn’t do anything.” I wish
this was their fault. I wish I could
blame this on someone else. I look over
Kilorn’s head, meeting Cal’s eyes.
Something releases in him, and he nods,
communicating without words. I don’t
have to lie about this.
    “This is what I am.”
    Kilorn’s frown deepens. “Are you
one of them?” I’ve never heard so much
anger, so much disgust, forced into a
single sentence. It makes me feel like
dying. “Are you?”
    Mom recovers first and, without a
glimmer of fear, takes my hand. “Mare is
my daughter, Kilorn,” she says, fixing
him with a frightening stare I didn’t
know she could muster. “We all know
that.”
    My family murmurs in agreement,
rallying to my side, but Kilorn remains
unconvinced. He stares at me like I’m a
stranger, like we haven’t known each
other all our lives.
    “Give me a knife and I’ll settle this
right now,” I say, glaring back at him.
“I’ll show you what color I bleed.”
    This calms him a bit and he pulls
back. “I just—I don’t understand.”
    That makes two of us.
    “I think I’m with Kilorn on this one.
We know who you are, Mare, but—”
Bree stumbles, searching for the right
thing to say. He’s never been one for
words. “How?”
    I barely know what to say, but I do
my best to explain. Again, I’m painfully
aware of Cal’s presence, always
listening, so I leave out the Guard and
Julian’s findings, to lay out the last three
weeks as plainly as possible. Pretending
to be Silver, being betrothed to a prince,
learning to control myself—it sounds
preposterous, but they listen intently.
     “We don’t know how or why, just
that this is,” I finish, holding out my
other hand. I don’t miss Tramy flinch
away. “We might never know what this
means.”
     Mom’s hand tightens on mine in a
display of support. The small comfort
does wonders for me. I’m still angry,
still devastatingly sad, but the need to
destroy something fades. I’m gaining
back some semblance of control, enough
to keep myself in check.
    “I think it’s a miracle,” she murmurs,
forcing a smile for my sake. “We’ve
always wanted better for you, and now,
we’re getting it. Bree and Tramy are
safe, Gisa won’t have to worry, we can
live happy, and you”—her watery eyes
meet mine—“you, my dear, will be
someone special. What more can a
mother ask?”
    I wish her words were true, but I nod
anyway, smiling for my mother and my
family. I’m getting better at lying, and
they seem to believe me. But not Kilorn.
He still seethes, trying to hold back
another outburst.
    “What’s he like, the prince?” Mom
prods. “Maven?”
     Dangerous ground . I can feel Cal
listening, waiting to hear what I have to
say about his younger brother. What can
I say? That he’s kind? That I’m
beginning to like him? That I still don’t
know if I can trust him? Or worse, that
I can never trust anyone again? “He’s
not what I expected.”
     Gisa notes my discomfort and turns
toward Cal. “So who’s this, your
bodyguard?” she says, changing the
subject with the slightest wink.
     “I am,” Cal says, answering for me.
He knows I don’t want to lie to my
family, not more than I have to. “And I’m
sorry, but we have to be going soon.”
     His words are like a twisting knife,
but I must obey them. “Yes.”
     Mom stands with me, holding on to
my hand so tightly I’m afraid it might
break. “We won’t say anything, of
course.”
     “Not a word,” Dad agrees. My
siblings nod as well, swearing to be
silent.
     But Kilorn’s face falls into a dark
scowl. For some reason, he’s become so
angry and I can’t for the life of me say
why. But I’m angry too. Shade’s death
still weighs on me like a terrible stone.
“Kilorn?”
     “Yeah, I won’t talk,” he spits.
Before I can stop him, he gets up from
his chair and sweeps out in a whirlwind
that spins the air. The door slams behind
him, shaking the walls. I’m used to
Kilorn’s emotions, his rare moments of
despair, but this rage is something new
from him. I don’t know how to deal with
it.
     My sister’s touch brings me back,
reminding me that this is good-bye.
“This is a gift,” she whispers in my ear.
“Don’t waste it.”
     “You’ll come back, won’t you?”
Bree says, and Gisa pulls away. For the
first time since he left for war, I see fear
in his eyes. “You’re a princess now, you
get to make the rules.”
     I wish.
     Cal and I exchange glances. I can tell
by the tight set of his mouth and the
darkness in his eyes what my answer
should be.
   “I’ll try,” I whisper, my voice
breaking. One more lie can’t hurt.

When we reach the edge of the Stilts,
Gisa’s good-bye still haunts me. There
was no blame in her eyes, even though
I’ve taken everything from her. Her last
words echo on the wind, drowning out
everything else. Don’t waste it.
    “I’m sorry about your brother,” Cal
blurts out. “I didn’t know he—”
    “—was already dead?” Executed
for desertion. Another lie. The rage
rises again, and I don’t even want to
control it. But what can I do about it?
What can I do to avenge my brother, or
even try to save the others?
    Don’t waste it.
    “I need to make one more stop.”
Before Cal can protest, I put on my best
smile. “It won’t take long at all, I
promise.”
    To my surprise, he nods slowly in
the dark.

“A job at the Hall, that’s very
prestigious.” Will chortles as I take a
seat inside his wagon. The old blue
candle still burns, casting shifting light
around us. As I suspected, Farley is long
gone.
    When I’m sure the door and
windows are shut, I drop my voice. “I’m
not working there, Will. They—”
    To my surprise, Will waves a hand
at me. “Oh, I know all that. Tea?”
    “Uh, no.” My words shake with
shock. “How did you—?”
    “The royal monkeys chose a queen
this past week, of course they had to
broadcast it in the Silver cities,” a voice
says from behind a curtain. The figure
steps out, revealing not Farley but what
looks like a beanpole in human form.
His head scrapes the ceiling, making him
duck awkwardly. His crimson hair is
long, matching the red sash draped
across his body from shoulder to hip.
It’s clasped with the same sun badge
Farley wore in her broadcast. And I
don’t miss the gun belt around his waist,
full of shiny bullets and a pair of pistols.
He’s Scarlet Guard too.
     “You’ve been all over the Silver
screens, Lady Titanos.” He says my title
like a curse. “You and that Samos girl.
Tell me, is she as unpleasant as she
looks?”
     “This is Tristan, one of Farley’s
lieutenants,” Will pipes in. He turns a
chiding eye on him. “Tristan, be gentle.”
     “Why?” I scoff. “Evangeline Samos
is a bloodthirsty jerk.”
     Smiling, Tristan throws a smug look
at Will.
     “They aren’t all monkeys,” I add
quietly, remembering Maven’s kind
words earlier today.
     “Are you talking about the prince
you’re engaged to or the one waiting in
the woods?” Will asks calmly, like he’s
asking about the price of flour.
    In stark contrast, Tristan erupts,
vaulting out of his seat. I beat him to the
door, two hands outstretched. Thankfully
I keep myself in check. The last thing I
need is to electrify a member of the
Scarlet Guard.
    “You brought a Silver here?” he
hisses down at me. “The prince? Do you
know what we could do if we took him
in? What we could bargain for?”
    Though he towers over me, I don’t
back down. “You leave him alone.”
    “A few weeks in the lap of luxury
and your blood is as silver as theirs,” he
spits, looking like he wants to kill me.
“You going to electrocute me too?”
    That stings, and he knows it. I drop
my hands, afraid they might betray me.
“I’m not protecting him, I’m protecting
you, you stupid fool. Cal is a soldier
born and bred, and he could burn this
whole village down if he really wanted
to.” Not that he would. I hope.
    Tristan’s hand strays to his gun. “I’d
like to see him try.”
    But Will lays a wrinkled hand on his
arm. The touch is enough to make the
rebel deflate. “That’s enough,” he
whispers. “What did you come here for,
Mare? Kilorn is safe, and so are your
siblings.”
    I heave a breath, still staring down
Tristan. He just threatened to kidnap Cal
and hold him for ransom. And for
whatever reason, the thought of such a
thing unsettles me to my core.
    “My—” One word out and I’m
already struggling. “Shade was part of
the Guard.” It’s not a question anymore,
but a truth. Will lowers his gaze,
apologetic, and Tristan even hangs his
head. “They killed him for it. They
killed my brother, and I have to act like
it doesn’t bother me.”
    “You’re dead if you don’t.”
    “I know that. I’ll say whatever they
want when the time comes. But—” My
voice catches a little, on the edge of this
new path. “I’m in the palace, the center
of their world. I’m quick, I’m quiet, and
I can help the cause.”
    Tristan sucks in a ragged breath,
pulling back to his full height. Despite
his anger earlier, there’s now something
like pride shining in his eyes. “You want
to join up.”
    “I do.”
    Will clenches his jaw, his stare
piercing through me. “I hope you know
what you’re committing to. This isn’t
just my war or Farley’s or the Scarlet
Guard’s—it’s yours. Until the very end.
And not to avenge your brother but to
avenge us all. To fight for the ones
before, and to save the ones yet to
come.”
    His gnarled hand reaches for mine
and for the first time, I notice a tattoo
around his wrist: a red band. Like the
ones they make us wear. Except now
he’s wearing his forever. It’s part of
him, like the blood in our veins.
    “Are you with us, Mare Barrow?” he
says, his hand closing over mine. More
war, more death, Cal said. But there’s a
chance he’s wrong. There’s a chance
we can change it.
    My fingers tighten, holding on to
Will. I can feel the weight of my action,
the importance behind it.
    “I’m with you.”
    “We will rise,” he breathes, in
unison with Tristan. I remember the
words and speak with them. “Red as the
dawn.”
   In the flickering candlelight, our
shadows look like monsters on the
walls.

When I join back up with Cal at the edge
of town, I feel lighter somehow,
emboldened by my decision and the
prospect of what’s to come. Cal walks
alongside      me,     glancing     over
occasionally, but says nothing. Where I
would poke and prod and forcibly pull
an answer out of someone, Cal is the
complete opposite. Maybe it’s a military
tactic he picked up in one of his books:
let the enemy come to you.
     Because that’s what I am now. His
enemy.
    He perplexes me, just like his
brother. Both of them are kind, even
though they know I’m Red, even though
they shouldn’t even see me at all. But
Cal took me home, and Maven was good
to me, wanting to help. They are strange
boys.
    When we enter the woods again,
Cal’s demeanor changes, hardening to
something serious. “I’ll have to talk with
the queen about changing your
schedule.”
    “Why?”
    “You almost exploded in there,” he
says gently. “You’ll have to go into
Training with us, to make sure something
like that doesn’t happen again.”
     Julian is training me. But even the
little voice in my head knows Julian is
no substitute for what Cal, Maven, and
Evangeline go through. If I learned even
half of what they know, who knows
what help I could be to the Guard? To
Shade’s memory?
     “Well, if it gets me out of Protocol, I
won’t say no.”
     Suddenly, Cal jumps back from his
cycle. His hands are on fire and an
equal, blazing light burns in his eyes.
     “Someone’s watching us.”
     I don’t bother questioning him. Cal’s
soldier’s sense is sharp, but what could
threaten him here? What could he
possibly be afraid of in the woods of a
sleepy, poor village? A village crawling
with rebels, I remind myself.
    But instead of Farley or armed
revolutionaries, Kilorn steps out of the
leaves. I forgot how sly he is, how
easily he can move through darkness.
    Cal’s hands extinguish in a puff of
smoke. “Oh, you.”
    Kilorn tears his eyes away from me,
glaring at Cal. He inclines his head in a
condescending bow. “Excuse me, Your
Highness.”
    Instead of trying to deny it, Cal
stands a little straighter, looking like the
king he was born to be. He doesn’t reply
and goes back to freeing his cycle from
the leaves. But I feel his eyes on me,
watching every second that passes
between Kilorn and me.
    “You’re really doing this?” Kilorn
says, looking like a wounded animal.
“You’re really leaving? To be one of
them?”
    The words sting more than a slap.
This is not a choice, I want to tell him.
    “You saw what happened in there,
what I can do. They can help me.” Even
I’m surprised at how easily the lie
comes. One day I might even be able to
lie to myself, to trick my mind into
thinking I’m happy. “I’m where I’m
supposed to be.”
    He shakes his head, one hand
grabbing my arm like he can pull me
back into the past, where our worries
were simple. “You’re supposed to be
here.”
    “Mare.” Cal waits patiently, leaning
against the seat of the cycle, but his
voice is firm, a warning.
    “I have to go.” I try to push past
Kilorn, to leave him behind, but he
won’t let me. He’s always been stronger
than me. And as much as I want to let
him hold on to me, it just can’t be.
    “Mare, please—”
    A wave of heat pulses against us,
like a strong beam of sunlight.
    “Let her go,” Cal rumbles, standing
over me. The heat rolls off him, almost
rippling the air. The calm he fights to
maintain thins, threatening to come
undone.
     Kilorn scoffs in his face, itching for
a fight. But he’s like me; we’re thieves,
we’re rats. We know when to fight and
when to run. Reluctantly, he pulls back,
letting his fingers trail along my arm.
This might be the last time we see each
other.
     The air cools, but Cal doesn’t step
back. I’m his brother’s betrothed—he
has to be protective of me.
     “You bargained for me too, to save
me from conscription,” Kilorn says
softly, finally understanding the price
I’ve paid. “You have a bad habit of
trying to save me.”
     I can barely nod, and I have to pull
the helmet onto my head to hide the tears
welling in my eyes. Numbly, I follow
Cal to the cycle and slide onto the seat
behind him.
    Kilorn backs away, flinching when
the cycle revs up. Then he smirks at me,
his features curling into an expression
that used to make me want to punch him.
    “I’ll tell Farley you said hello.”
    The cycle growls like a beast,
tearing me away from Kilorn and the
Stilts and my old life. Fear curls through
me like a poison, until I’m scared from
head to toe. But not for myself. Not
anymore. I’m scared for Kilorn, for the
idiotic thing he’s going to do.
    He’s going to find Farley. And he’s
going to join her.
              FIFTEEN

The next morning, I open my eyes to see
a shaded figure standing by my bedside.
This is it. I left, I broke the rules, and
they’re going to kill me for it.
    But not without a fight.
    Before the figure gets a chance, I fly
out of bed, ready to defend myself. My
muscles tense while the delightful
buzzing comes to life inside me. But
instead of an assassin, I’m staring at a
red uniform. And I recognize the woman
wearing it.
    Walsh looks the same as she did
before, though I certainly don’t. She
stands next to a metal cart filled with tea
and bread and anything else I might want
for breakfast. Ever the dutiful servant,
she keeps her mouth clamped shut, but
her eyes scream at me. She stares at my
hand, at the now too-familiar sparks
creeping around my fingers. I shake them
away, brushing off the veins of light until
they disappear back into my skin.
    “I’m so sorry,” I exclaim, jumping
away from her. Still, she doesn’t speak.
“Walsh—”
    But she busies herself with the food.
Then, to my great surprise, she mouths
five words to me. They are words I’m
beginning to know like a prayer—or a
curse. Rise, Red as the dawn.
    Before I can respond, before my
shock can register, Walsh presses a cup
of tea into my hand.
    “Wait—” I reach out for her, but she
dodges my hand, sweeping into a low
bow.
    “My lady,” she says, sharply ending
our conversation.
    I let her go, watching her back out of
the room until there’s nothing left but the
echo of her unspoken words.
    Walsh is in the Guard too.
    The teacup feels cold in my hand.
Strangely cold.
    I look down to find it’s not full of tea
but water. And at the bottom of the cup,
a piece of paper bleeds ink. The ink
swirls as I read the message, the water
leeching it away, erasing any trace, until
there’s nothing left but cloudy, gray
liquid and a blank curl of paper. No
evidence of my first act of rebellion.
     The message isn’t hard to remember.
It’s only one word.
     Midnight.
     This knowledge that I have a
connection to the group so close by
should comfort me, but for some reason,
I find myself shivering. Maybe cameras
aren’t the only things watching me
here.
     And it’s not the only note waiting for
me. My new schedule sits on the
nightstand, written in the queen’s
maddeningly perfect handwriting.
       Your schedule has changed.

      0630—Breakfast / 0700—
   Training / 1000—Protocol
      1130—Luncheon / 1300—
   Protocol / 1400—Lessons
      1800—Dinner.

      Lucas will escort you to all.
   Schedule is not negotiable.

       HRH Queen Elara.

“So, they’ve finally bumped you up to
Training?” Lucas grins at me, a rare bit
of pride shining through as he leads me
to my first session. “Either you’ve been
very good or very bad.”
     “A little bit of both.”
     More bad, I think, remembering my
episode last night at home. I know the
new schedule is Cal’s doing, but I didn’t
expect him to work so fast. Truthfully,
I’m excited for Training. If it’s anything
like what I saw Cal and Maven go
through, the ability practice in particular,
I’ll be hopelessly far behind, but at least
I’ll have someone to talk to. And if I’m
really lucky, Evangeline will be deathly
ill and stuck in bed for the rest of her
miserable life.
     Lucas shakes his head, chuckling.
“Be prepared. The instructors are
famous for being able to break even the
strongest soldiers. They won’t take well
to your sass.”
     “I don’t take well to being broken,” I
retort. “What was your Training like?”
     “Well, I went straight to the army
when I was nine, so my experience was
a bit different,” he says, eyes darkening
at the memory.
     “Nine?” The thought seems
impossible to me. Abilities or not, this
can’t be true.
     But Lucas shrugs like it’s nothing.
“The front is the best place for training.
Even the princes were trained at the
front, for a time.”
     “But you’re here now,” I say. My
eyes linger on Lucas’s uniform, on the
black and silver of Security. “You’re not
a soldier anymore.”
     For the first time, Lucas’s dry smile
disappears completely. “It wears on
you,” he admits, more to himself than to
me. “Men are not meant to be at war for
long.”
     “And what about Reds?” I hear
myself ask. Bree, Tramy, Shade, Dad,
Kilorn’s father. And a thousand others.
A million others. “Can they stand war
better than Silvers?”
     We reach the door to the training hall
before Lucas finally answers, looking a
little uncomfortable. “That’s the way the
world works. Reds serve, Reds work,
Reds fight. It’s what they’re good at. It’s
what they’re meant to do.” I have to bite
my tongue to keep myself from shouting
at him. “Not everyone is special.”
     Anger boils in me, but I don’t say a
word against Lucas. Losing my temper,
even with him, won’t be smiled upon. “I
can take it from here,” I say stiffly.
     He notes my discomfort, frowning a
little. When he speaks, his voice is low
and fast, as if he doesn’t want to be
overheard. “I don’t have the luxury of
questions,” he mutters. His black eyes
bore into mine, full of meaning. “And
neither do you.”
     My heart clenches, terrified by his
words and their veiled meaning. Lucas
knows there’s more to me than what
he’s been told. “Lucas—”
     “It’s not my place to ask questions.”
He furrows his brow, trying to make me
understand, trying to put me at ease.
“Lady Titanos.” The title sounds firmer
than ever, becoming my shield as well
as the queen’s weapon.
    Lucas will not ask questions.
Despite his black eyes, his Silver blood,
his Samos family, he will not pull at the
thread that could unravel my existence.
    “Keep to your schedule, my lady.”
He pulls back, more formal than I’ve
ever seen him. With a flick of his head,
he gestures to the door where a Red
attendant waits. “I’ll collect you after
Training.”
    “Thank you, Lucas,” is all I can
manage. He’s given me so much more
than he knows.
    The attendant hands me a stretchy
black suit with purple and silver stripes.
He points me to a tiny room, where I
change quickly, slipping out of my usual
clothes and into the jumpsuit. It reminds
me of my old clothes, the ones I used
back in the Stilts. Worn by time and
movement, but trim and tight enough not
to slow me down.
    When I enter the training hall, I’m
painfully aware of everyone staring at
me, not to mention the dozens of
cameras. The floor feels soft and springy
beneath my feet, cushioning each step.
An immense skylight rises above us,
showing a blue summer sky full of
clouds to taunt me. Winding stairs
connect the several levels cut into the
walls, each at varying heights with
different equipment. There are many
windows as well, one of which I know
opens to Lady Blonos’s classroom.
Where the others go or who might be
watching from them, I have no idea.
    I should be nervous about walking
into a room full of teen warriors, all of
them better trained than me. Instead, I’m
thinking about the insufferable icicle of
bone and metal known as Evangeline
Samos. I barely make it halfway across
the floor before her mouth opens,
dripping venom.
    “Graduated from Protocol already?
Did you finally master the art of sitting
with your legs crossed?” she sneers,
jumping up from a weight-lifting
machine. Her silver hair is tied back into
a complicated braid I’d very much like
to cut off, but the deathly sharp metal
blades at her waist give me pause. Like
me, like everyone else, she wears a
jumpsuit emblazoned with the colors of
her house. In black and silver, she looks
deadly.
    Sonya and Elane flank her with
matching smirks. Now that they’re not
intimidating me, they seem to be sucking
up to the future queen herself.
    I do my best to ignore them all and
find myself looking for Maven. He sits
in a corner, separated from the others. At
least we can be alone together.
Whispers follow me, as more than a
dozen noble teenagers watch me walk
toward him. A few bow their heads,
trying to be courteous, but most look
cautious. The girls are especially on
edge; after all, I did take one of their
princes away.
    “Took you long enough.” Maven
chuckles once I sit down next to him. He
doesn’t seem to be part of the crowd,
nor does he want to be. “If I didn’t know
any better, I’d say you were trying to
stay away from us.”
    “Just one person in particular,” I
reply, casting a glance back to
Evangeline. She holds court near the
target wall, where she shows off for her
cronies in a dazzling display. Her metal
knives sing through the air, digging into
the dead center of their targets.
    Maven watches me watch her, his
eyes thoughtful. “When we go back to
the capital, you won’t have to see her so
much,” he murmurs. “She and Cal will
have their hands full touring the country,
fulfilling their duties. And we’ll have
ours.”
    The prospect of getting far away
from Evangeline is exciting, but also
reminds me of the steadily ticking clock
moving against me. Soon I’ll be forced
to leave the Hall, the river valley, and
my family far behind.
    “Do you know when you—” I
stumble, correcting myself. “I mean,
when we go back to the capital?”
     “After the Parting Ball. You were
told about that?”
     “Yes, your mother mentioned it—
and Lady Blonos is trying to teach me
how to dance. . . .” I trail off, feeling
embarrassed. She tried to teach me a
few steps yesterday, but I just ended up
falling all over myself. Thieving I can do
just fine, but dancing is apparently out of
my reach. “Key word, trying.”
     “Don’t worry, we won’t have to deal
with the worst of it.”
     The thought of dancing terrifies me,
but I swallow the fear. “Who will?”
     “Cal,” he says without hesitation.
“Big brother has to tolerate too many
silly conversations and dance with a lot
of annoying girls. I remember last year .
. .” He stops to laugh at the memory.
“Sonya Iral spent the entire time
following him around, cutting into
dances, trying to drag him away for
some fun. I had to interfere and suffer
through two songs with her to give Cal
some respite.”
    The thought of the two brothers
united against a legion of desperate girls
makes me laugh, thinking about the
lengths they must’ve gone to, to save
each other. But as my smirk spreads,
Maven’s smile fades.
    “At least this time, he’ll have Samos
hanging off his arm. The girls wouldn’t
dare cross her.”
    I snort, remembering her sharp,
biting grip on my arm. “Poor Cal.”
    “And how was your visit
yesterday?” he says, referring to my
jaunt home. So Cal didn’t fill him in.
    “Difficult.” It’s the only way I know
how to describe it. Now my family
knows what I am, and Kilorn has thrown
himself to the wolves. And of course,
Shade is dead. “One of my brothers was
executed, just before the release came.”
    He shifts next to me, and I expect
him to be uncomfortable. After all, it
was his own people who did it. Instead,
he puts a hand over mine. “I’m so sorry,
Mare. I’m sure he didn’t deserve it.”
    “No, he didn’t,” I whisper,
remembering why my brother died. Now
I’m on the same path.
     Maven stares at me intently, like he’s
trying to read the secret in my eyes. For
once I’m glad for Blonos’s lessons, or
else I would assume Maven could read
minds as well as the queen. But no, he’s
a burner and a burner alone. Few Silvers
inherit abilities from their mothers, and
no one has ever had more than one
ability. So my secret, my new allegiance
to the Scarlet Guard, is mine.
     When he extends a hand to help me
up, I take it. All around us, the others
warm up, mostly stretching or jogging
around the room, but a few are more
impressive. Elane slips in and out of my
vision as she bends the light around
herself until she disappears altogether. A
windweaver boy, Oliver of House Laris,
creates a miniature whirlwind between
his hands, stirring up tiny bits of dust.
Sonya lazily trades blows with Andros
Eagrie, a short but muscular eighteen-
year-old. As a silk, Sonya is brutally
skilled and fast and should be able to
best him, but Andros matches her blow
for blow in a violent dance. The Silvers
of House Eagrie are eyes, meaning they
can see the immediate future, and
Andros is using his abilities to their full
extent. Neither one seems to gain the
upper hand, playing a game of balance
rather than strength.
    Just imagine what they can really
do. So strong, so powerful. And these
are only the kids. And just like that, my
hope evaporates, shifting into fear.
    “Lines,” a voice says, barely a
whisper.
    My new instructor enters without a
sound, Cal at his side, with a telky from
House Provos behind them both. Like a
good soldier, Cal walks in step with the
instructor, who seems tiny and
unassuming next to Cal’s bulk. There are
wrinkles in his pale skin, and his hair is
as white as his clothing, a testament to
his true age and his house. House Arven,
the silent house, I remember, thinking
back to my lessons. A major house, full
of power and strength and all the things
the Silvers put their faith in. I even
remember him from before I became
Mareena Titanos, from when I was a
little girl. He would oversee the
broadcasted executions in the capital,
lording over the Reds and even the
Silvers sentenced to die. And now I
know why they chose him to do it.
     The Haven girl blinks back into
existence, suddenly visible again, while
the churning wind dies in Oliver’s
hands. Evangeline’s knives drop out of
the air, and even I feel a calm blanket of
nothing fall over me, blotting out my
electrical sense.
     He is Rane Arven, the instructor, the
executioner, the silence. He can reduce a
Silver to what they hate most: a Red. He
can turn their abilities off. He can make
them normal.
    While I gawk, Maven pulls me into
place behind him, with Cal at the head of
our line. Evangeline leads the line next
to us, and for once she doesn’t seem
concerned with me. Her eyes stay on Cal
as he settles in, looking quite at home in
his place of authority.
    Arven       doesn’t     waste     time
introducing me. In fact, he barely seems
to notice I’ve joined his session.
    “Laps,” he says, his voice rough and
low.
    Good. Something I can actually do.
    We set off in our lines, circling the
room at an easy pace in blissful quiet. I
push myself faster, enjoying the exercise
I missed so much, until I’m speeding
right past Evangeline. Then it’s just Cal
next to me, setting the pace for the rest of
them. He quirks a smile at me, watching
me run. This is something I can do,
something I even enjoy.
    My feet feel strange on the cushioned
floor, bouncing with every step, but the
blood pounding in my ears, the sweat,
the pace are all familiar. If I close my
eyes, I can pretend I’m back in the
village, with Kilorn or my brothers or
just by myself. Just free.
    That is until a section of the wall
swings out, catching me in the stomach.
    It knocks me to the floor, sending me
sprawling, but it’s my pride that really
hurts. The pack of runners pulls away,
and Evangeline smirks over her
shoulder, watching me fall behind. Only
Maven slows his pace, waiting for me to
catch up.
    “Welcome to training.” He chuckles,
watching me pry myself off the obstacle.
    All over the room, other parts of the
wall shift, forming barriers for the
runners. Everyone else takes it in stride;
they’re used to this. Cal and Evangeline
lead the pack, moving over and under
each obstacle as it appears before them.
Out of the corner of my eye, I notice the
Provos telky directing the pieces of
wall, making them move. He even seems
to be smirking at me.
    I fight back the urge to snap at the
telky and push myself back into a jog.
Maven runs next to me, never more than
a step away, and it’s strangely
infuriating. My pace quickens, until I’m
sprinting and hurdling to the best of my
ability. But Maven isn’t like the Security
at home—it’s hard to leave him in the
dust.
    By the time we finish laps, Cal is the
only one who hasn’t broken a sweat.
Even Evangeline looks ragged, though
she tries her best to hide it. My breath
comes in heavy pants, but I’m proud of
myself. Despite the rough start, I
managed to keep up.
    Instructor Arven surveys us for a
moment, his eyes lingering on me, before
turning to the telky. “Targets please,
Theo,” he says, again barely a whisper.
Like drawing away a curtain to reveal
the sun, I feel my abilities rushing back.
     The telky assistant waves a hand,
sliding away a section of the floor,
revealing the strange gun I saw from the
window of Blonos’s classroom. I realize
it’s not a gun at all but a cylinder. Only
the telky’s power makes it move, not
some greater, strange technology. The
abilities are all they have.
     “Lady Titanos,” Arven murmurs,
making me shudder. “I understand you
have an interesting ability.”
     He’s thinking of the lightning, the
purple-white bolts of destruction, but my
mind strays to what Julian said
yesterday. I don’t just control, I can
create. I am special.
    Every eye turns to me, but I set my
jaw, trying to will myself into being
strong. “Interesting but not unheard of,
Instructor,” I say. “I’m very eager to
learn about it, sir.”
    “You may start now,” the instructor
says, and the telky behind him tenses.
    On cue, one of the ball targets flies
into the air, faster than I thought
possible.
    Control, I tell myself, repeating
Julian’s words. Focus.
    This time, I can feel the pull as I
suck the electricity from the air—and
from somewhere inside myself. It
manifests in my hands, shining to life in
little sparks. But the ball smacks the
floor before I can throw it, its sparks
bleeding into the floor and disappearing.
Evangeline snickers behind me, but
when I turn to glare at her, my eyes find
Maven instead. He barely nods, urging
me to try again. And next to him, Cal
crosses his arms, his face dark with an
emotion I can’t place.
     Another target rockets up, turning
over in the air. The sparks come sooner
now, alive and bright as the target
reaches its zenith. Like before in Julian’s
classroom, I ball my fist and, feeling the
power rage through me, I throw.
     It arcs in a beautiful display of
destructive light, clipping the side of the
falling target. It shatters under my
power, smoking and sparking as it hits
the floor with a crash.
     I can’t help but grin, pleased with
myself. Behind me, Maven and Cal clap,
as do a few of the other kids. Evangeline
and her friends certainly do not—they
look almost insulted by my victory.
     But Instructor Arven doesn’t say
anything, not bothering to congratulate
me. He simply looks over me, to the rest
of the unit. “Next.”

The instructor runs the class ragged,
forcing us through round after round of
exercises meant to fine-tune our
abilities. Of course, I fall behind in all
of them, but I can also feel myself
improving. By the time the session ends,
I’m dripping sweat and sore all over.
Julian’s lesson is a blessing, allowing
me to sit and recover my strength. But
even the session that morning cannot
entirely drain me—midnight is coming.
The faster time passes, the closer to
midnight I get. The closer to taking the
next step, to taking control of my fate.
    Julian doesn’t notice my unease,
probably because he’s elbow-deep in a
pile of newly bound books. Each one is
about an inch thick and neatly labeled
with a year but nothing else. What they
could possibly be, I don’t know.
    “What are these?” I ask, picking up
one. Inside it’s a mess of lists: names,
dates, locations—and causes of death.
Most just say blood loss, but there’s also
disease, suffocation, drowning, and
some more specific and gruesome
details. My blood runs cold in my veins
as I realize exactly what I’m reading. “A
death list.”
    Julian nods. “Every person who ever
died fighting in the Lakelander War.”
    Shade, I think, feeling my meal churn
in my stomach. Something tells me he
won’t get his name in one of these.
Deserters don’t get the honor of a line of
ink. Angry, I let my mind reach out to the
desk lamp illuminating my reading. The
electricity in it calls to me, as familiar
as my own pulse. With nothing more than
my brain, I turn it on and off, blinking in
time with my ragged heartbeat.
    Julian notes the flashing light, lips
pursed. “Something wrong, Mare?” he
asks dryly.
    Everything is wrong.
    “I’m not a fan of the schedule
change,” I say instead, letting the lamp
be. It’s not a lie, but it’s not the truth
either. “We won’t be able to train.”
    He only shrugs, his parchment-
colored clothes shifting with the motion.
They look dirtier somehow, like he’s
turning into the pages of his books.
“From what I hear, you need more
guidance than I can give you.”
    My teeth grind together, chewing on
the words before I can spit them out.
“Did Cal tell you what happened?”
    “He did,” Julian replies evenly.
“And he’s right. Don’t fault him for it.”
    “I can fault him for whatever I
want,” I snort, remembering the war
books and death guides all over his
room. “He’s just like all the others.”
    Julian opens his mouth to say
something but thinks better of it at the
last moment and turns back to his books.
“Mare, I wouldn’t exactly call what we
do training. Besides, you looked very
good in your session today.”
    “You saw that? How?”
    “I asked to watch.”
    “Wha—?”
    “It doesn’t matter,” he says, looking
straight through me. His voice is
suddenly melodic, humming with deep,
soothing vibrations. Exhaling, I realize
he’s right.
    “It doesn’t matter,” I repeat. Even
though he isn’t speaking, the echo of
Julian’s voice still hangs in the air like a
calming breeze. “So, what are we
working on today?”
    Julian smirks, amused with himself.
“Mare.”
    His voice is normal again, simple
and familiar. It breaks apart the echoes,
wiping them away from me in a lifting
cloud. “What—what the hell was that?”
    “I take it Lady Blonos hasn’t spoken
much about House Jacos in Lessons?” he
says, still smirking. “I’m surprised you
never asked.”
      Truly, I’ve never wondered about
Julian’s ability. I always thought it
would be something weak, because he
doesn’t seem as pompous as the others
—but it looks like that isn’t true at all.
He’s much stronger and more dangerous
than I ever realized.
      “You can control people. You’re
l i k e her.” The thought of Julian, a
sympathizer, a good person, being at all
like the queen makes me shake.
      He takes the accusation in stride,
shifting his attention back to his book.
“No, I’m not. I have nowhere near her
strength. Or her brutality.” He heaves a
sigh, explaining. “We’re called singers.
Or at least we would be, if there were
any more of us. I’m the last of my house,
and the last of, well, my kind. I can’t
read minds, I can’t control thoughts, I
can’t speak in your head. But I can sing
—as long as someone hears me, as long
as I can look into their eyes—I can make
a person do as I wish.”
    Horror bleeds through me. Even
Julian.
    Slowly, I lean back, wanting to put
some distance between him and myself.
He notices, of course, but doesn’t look
angry.
    “You’re right not to trust me,” he
murmurs. “No one does. There’s a
reason my only friends are written
words. But I don’t do it unless I
absolutely need to, and I’ve never done
it with malice.” Then he snorts, laughing
darkly. “If I really wanted, I could talk
my way to the throne.”
    “But you haven’t.”
    “No. And neither did my sister, no
matter what anyone else might say.”
    Cal’s mother . “No one seems to say
anything about her. Not to me, anyways.”
    “People don’t like to talk about dead
queens,” he snaps, turning away from me
in a smooth motion. “But they talked
when she was alive. Coriane Jacos, the
Singer Queen.” I’ve never seen Julian
this way, not once. Usually he’s quiet,
calm, a little obsessed maybe, but never
angry. Never so hurt. “She wasn’t
chosen by Queenstrial, you know. Not
like Elara, or Evangeline, or even you.
No, Tibe married my sister because he
loved her—and she loved him.”
    Tibe. Calling Tiberias Calore the
Sixth, King of Norta, Flame of the North,
anything with less than eight syllables
seems preposterous. But he was young
once too. He was like Cal, a boy born to
become a king.
    “They hated her because we were
from a low house, because we didn’t
have strength or power or any other silly
thing those people uphold,” Julian rails
on, still looking away. His shoulders
heave with each breath. “And when my
sister became queen, she threatened to
change all that. She was kind,
compassionate, a mother who could
raise Cal to be the king this country
needed to unite us all. A king who
wouldn’t be afraid of change. But that
never came to be.”
    “I know what it’s like to lose a
sibling,” I murmur, remembering Shade.
It doesn’t seem real, like maybe
everyone is just lying and he’s at home
now, happy and safe. But I know that
isn’t true. And somewhere, my brother’s
decapitated body lies as proof of that. “I
only found out last night. My brother
died at the front.”
    Julian finally turns back around, his
eyes glassy. “I’m sorry, Mare. I didn’t
realize.”
    “You wouldn’t. The army doesn’t
report executions in their little books.”
    “Executed?”
    “Desertion.” The word tastes like
blood, like a lie. “Even though he never
would.”
    After a long moment of silence,
Julian puts a hand on my shoulder. “It
seems we have more in common than
you think, Mare.”
    “What do you mean?”
    “They killed my sister too. She stood
in the way, and she was removed.
And”—his voice drops—“they’ll do it
again, to anyone they have to. Even Cal,
even Maven, and especially you.”
    Especially me. The little lightning
girl.
    “I thought you wanted to change
things, Julian.”
    “I do indeed. But these things take
time, planning, and too much luck to
count on.” He stares me up and down,
like somehow he knows I’ve already
taken the first step down a dark path. “I
don’t want you getting in over your
head.”
    Too late.
             SIXTEEN

After a week of staring at my clock,
waiting for midnight, I begin to despair.
Of course Farley can’t reach us here.
Even she is not so talented. But tonight,
when the clock ticks, I feel nothing for
the first time since Queenstrial. No
cameras, no electricity, nothing. The
power is completely out. I’ve been in
blackouts before, too many to count, but
this is different. This isn’t an accident.
This is for me.
    Moving quickly, I slip into my boots,
now broken in by weeks of wear, and
head for the door. I’m barely out in the
hallway before I hear Walsh in my ear,
speaking softly and quickly as she pulls
me through the forced darkness.
    “We don’t have much time,” she
murmurs, hustling me into a service
stairwell. It’s pitch-black, but she knows
where we’re going, and I trust her to get
me there. “They’ll have the power back
on in fifteen minutes if we’re lucky.”
    “And if we aren’t?” I breathe in the
darkness.
    She hustles me down the stairs and
shoulders open a door. “Then I hope
you’re not too attached to your head.”
    The smell of earth and dirt and water
hits me first, churning up all my
memories of life in the woods. But even
though it looks like a forest, with gnarled
old trees and hundreds of plants painted
blue and black by the moon, a glass roof
rises     overhead. The conservatory.
Twisting shadows sprawl across the
ground, each one worse than the next. I
see Security and Sentinels in every dark
corner, waiting to capture and kill us
like they did my brother. But instead of
their horrific black or flame uniforms,
there’s nothing but flowers blooming
beneath the glass ceiling of stars.
    “Excuse me if I don’t curtsy,” a
voice says, emerging from a grove of
white-spangled magnolia trees. Her blue
eyes reflect the moon, glowing in the
dark with cold fire. Farley has a real
talent for theatrics.
    Like in her broadcast, she wears a
red scarf across her face, hiding her
features. But it doesn’t hide a ruinous
scar that marches down her neck,
disappearing beneath the collar of her
shirt. It looks new, barely beginning to
heal. She’s been busy since I last saw
her. But then, so have I.
    “Farley,” I say, tipping my head in
greeting.
    She doesn’t nod back, but then, I
didn’t expect her to. All business. “And
the other one?” she murmurs. Other
one?
    “Holland’s bringing him. Any
second now.” Walsh sounds breathless,
excited even, about whoever we’re
waiting for. Even Farley’s eyes shine.
    “What is it? Who else joined up?”
They don’t answer me, exchanging
glances instead. A few names run
through my head, servants and kitchen
boys who would support the cause.
    But the person who joins us is no
servant. He’s not even Red.
    “Maven.”
    I don’t know whether to scream or
run when I see my betrothed appear from
the shadows. He’s a prince, he’s Silver,
he’s the enemy, and yet, here he is,
standing with one of the leaders of the
Scarlet Guard. His companion Holland,
an aging Red servant with years of
service behind him, seems to swell with
pride.
    “I told you, you’re not alone, Mare,”
Maven says, but he doesn’t smile. A
hand twitches at his side—he’s all
nerves. Farley scares him.
    And I can see why. She steps toward
us, gun in hand, but she’s just as nervous
as he is. Still, her voice does not shake.
“I want to hear it from your lips, little
prince. Tell me what you told him,” she
says, tipping her head toward Holland.
    Maven sneers at “little prince,” his
lips curving in distaste, but he doesn’t
snap at her. “I want to join the Guard,”
he says, his voice full of conviction.
    She moves quickly, cocking the
pistol and taking aim in the same motion.
My heart seems to stop when she presses
the barrel to his forehead, but Maven
doesn’t flinch. “Why?” she hisses.
    “Because this world is wrong. What
my father has done, what my brother will
do, is wrong.” Even with a gun to his
head, he manages to speak calmly, but a
bead of sweat trickles down his neck.
Farley doesn’t pull away, waiting for a
better answer, and I find myself doing
the same.
    His eyes shift, moving to mine, and
he swallows hard. “When I was twelve,
my father sent me to the war front, to
toughen me up, to make me more like my
brother. Cal is perfect, you see, so why
couldn’t I be the same?”
    I can’t help but flinch at his words,
recognizing the pain in them. I lived in
Gisa’s shadow, and he lived in Cal’s. I
know what that life is like.
    Farley sniffs, almost laughing at him.
“I have no use for jealous little boys.”
    “I wish it was jealousy that drove
me here,” Maven murmurs. “I spent three
years in the barracks, following Cal and
officers and generals, watching soldiers
fight and die for a war no one believed
in. Where Cal saw honor and loyalty, I
saw foolishness. I saw waste. Blood on
both sides of the dividing line, and your
people gave so much more.”
    I remember the books in Cal’s room,
the tactics and maneuvers laid out like a
game. The memory makes me cringe, but
what Maven says next chills my blood.
    “There was a boy, just seventeen, a
Red from the frozen north. He didn’t
know me on sight, not like everyone
else, but he treated me just fine. He
treated me like a person. I think he was
my first real friend.” Maybe it’s a trick
of the moonlight, but something like tears
glimmer in his eyes. “His name was
Thomas, and I watched him die. I
could’ve saved him, but my guards held
me back. His life wasn’t worth mine,
they said.” Then the tears are gone,
replaced by clenched fists and an iron
will. “Cal calls this the balance, Silver
over Red. He’s a good person, and he’ll
be a just ruler, but he doesn’t think
change is worth the cost,” he says. “I’m
trying to tell you that I’m not the same as
the rest of them. I think my life is worth
yours, and I’ll give it gladly, if it means
change.”
    He is a prince and, worst of all, the
queen’s son. I didn’t want to trust him
before for this very reason, for the
secrets he kept hidden. Or maybe this is
what he was hiding all along . . . his
own heart.
    Though he tries his best to look grim,
to keep his spine straight and his lips
from trembling, I can see the boy beneath
the mask. Part of me wants to embrace
him, to comfort him, but Farley would
stop me before I could. When she lowers
her gun, slowly but surely, I let go of a
breath I didn’t realize I was holding in.
    “The boy speaks true,” the
manservant Holland says. He shifts to
stand next to Maven, strangely protective
of his prince. “He’s felt this way for
months now, since he returned from the
front.”
    “And you told him of us after a few
tear-filled nights?” Farley sneers,
turning her fearsome gaze on Holland.
But the man holds firm.
    “I’ve known the prince since
boyhood. Anyone close to him can see
his heart has changed.” Holland glances
sidelong at Maven, as if remembering
the boy he was. “Think what an ally he
could be. What a difference he could
make.”
     Maven is different. I know that
firsthand, but something tells me my
words won’t sway Farley. Only Maven
can do that now.
     “Swear on your colors,” she growls
at him.
     An ancient oath, according to Lady
Blonos. Like swearing on your life, your
family, and your children to come, all at
once. And Maven doesn’t hesitate to do
it.
     “I swear on my colors,” he says,
dipping his head. “I pledge myself to the
Scarlet Guard.” It sounds like his
marriage proposal, but this is far more
important, and more deadly.
     “Welcome to the Scarlet Guard,” she
finally says, pulling away her scarf.
     I move quietly over the tile floor
until I feel his hand in mine. It blazes
with now familiar heat. “Thank you,
Maven,” I whisper. “You don’t know
what this means to us.” To me.
     Any other would smile at the
prospect of recruiting a Silver, and a
royal at that, but Farley barely reacts at
all. “What are you willing to do for us?”
     “I can give you information,
intelligence, whatever you might need to
continue forward with your operation. I
sit on tax councils with my father—”
     “We don’t care about taxes,” Farley
snaps. She casts an angry glance at me,
as if it’s my fault she doesn’t like what
he’s offering. “What we need are names,
locations, targets. What to hit and when
to cause the most damage. Can you give
me that?”
     Maven shifts, uncomfortable. “I
would prefer a less hostile path,” he
mutters. “Your violent methods aren’t
winning you any friends.”
     Farley scoffs, letting the sound echo
over the conservatory. “Your people are
a thousand times more violent and cruel
than mine. We’ve spent the last few
centuries under a Silver boot, and we’re
not going to get out by being nice.”
     “I suppose,” Maven murmurs. I can
tell he’s thinking of Thomas, of everyone
he watched die. His shoulder brushes
mine as he pulls back, retreating into me
for protection. Farley doesn’t miss it and
almost laughs out loud.
    “The little prince and the little
lightning girl.” She laughs. “You two
suit each other. One, a coward, and
you”—she turns to me, her steel-blue
eyes burning—“the last time we met, you
were scrabbling in the mud for a
miracle.”
    “I found it,” I tell her. To cement my
point, my hands spark up, casting
dancing purple light over us.
    The darkness seems to shift, and
members of the Scarlet Guard reveal
themselves in menacing order, stepping
out from trees and bushes. Their faces
are masked with scarves and bandannas,
but they don’t hide everything. The
tallest one must be Tristan, with his long
limbs. I can tell by the way they stand,
tense and ready for action, that they’re
afraid. But Farley’s face doesn’t change.
She knows the people meant to protect
her won’t do much against Maven, or
even me, but she doesn’t look at all
intimidated. To my great surprise, she
finally smiles. Her grin is fearsome, full
of teeth and a wild hunger.
    “We can bomb and burn every inch
of this country down,” she murmurs,
looking between us with something like
pride, “but that will never do the damage
you two can do. A Silver prince turning
against his crown, a Red girl with
abilities. What will people say, when
they see you standing with us?”
    “I thought you wanted—,” Maven
starts, but Farley waves the words away.
    “The bombings are just a way to get
attention. Once we have it, once every
Silver in this forsaken country is
watching, we need something to show
them.” Her gaze turns calculating as she
measures us up, weighing us against
whatever she has in mind. “I think you’ll
do quite nicely.”
    My voice trembles, dreading what
she might say. “As what?”
    “The face of our glorious
revolution,” she says proudly, tossing
her head back. Her golden hair catches
the moonlight. For a second, she seems
to wear a sparkling crown. “The drop of
water to break the dam.”
    Maven nods with fervor.
    “So, where do we start?”
    “Well, I think it’s time we took a
page out of Mare’s book of mischief.”
    “What’s that supposed to mean?” I
don’t understand, but Maven follows
Farley’s line of thought easily.
    “My father has been covering up
other attacks by the Guard,” he mutters,
explaining her plan.
    My mind flickers back to Colonel
Macanthos and her outburst at luncheon.
“The airfield, Delphie, Harbor Bay.”
    Maven nods. “He called them
accidents, training exercises, lies. But
when you sparked up at Queenstrial,
even my mother couldn’t talk you away.
We need something like that, something
no one can hide. To show the world the
Scarlet Guard is very dangerous and
very real.”
     “But won’t that have consequences?”
My thoughts flash back to the riot, to the
innocent people tortured and killed by a
mindless horde. “The Silvers will turn
on us, things will get worse.”
     Farley looks away, unable to hold
my gaze. “And more will join us. More
will realize the lives we live are wrong
and that something can be done to change
it. We’ve stood still for far too long; it’s
time to make sacrifices and move
forward.”
     “Was my brother your sacrifice?” I
snap, feeling anger flare within me.
“Was his death worth it to you?”
    To her credit, she doesn’t try to lie.
“Shade knew what he was getting into.”
    “And what about everyone else?
What about the kids and the elders and
anyone who hasn’t signed up for your
‘glorious revolution’? What happens
when Sentinels start rounding them up
for punishment when they can’t find
you?”
    Maven’s voice is warm and soft in
my ear. “Think of your histories, Mare.
What has Julian taught you?”
    He taught me about death. The
before. The wars. But beyond that, in a
time when things could still change,
there were revolutions. The people rose,
the empires fell, and things changed.
Liberty moved in arcs, rising and falling
with the tide of time.
    “Revolution needs a spark,” I
murmur, repeating what Julian would
say in our lessons. “And even sparks
burn.”
    Farley smiles. “You should know
that better than anyone.”
    But I’m still not convinced. The pain
of losing Shade, of knowing my parents
have lost a child, will only multiply if
we do this. How many more Shades will
die?
    Strangely it’s Maven, not Farley,
who tries to sway me.
    “Cal believes that change is not
worth the cost,” he says. His voice
shakes, quivering with nerves and
conviction. “And he’s going to rule one
day—do you want to let him be the
future?”
     For once, my answer is easy. “No.”
     Farley nods, pleased. “Walsh and
Holland”—she jerks her head toward
them—“tell me there’s going to be a
little party here.”
     “The ball,” Maven offers.
     “It’s an impossible target,” I snap.
“Everyone will have guards; the queen
will know if something goes wrong—”
     “She will not,” Maven breaks in,
almost scoffing at the idea. “My mother
is not all-powerful, as she would want
you to believe. Even she has limits.”
     Limits? The queen? Just the thought
makes my mind run wild. “How can you
say that? You know what she can do—”
     “I know that in the middle of a ball,
with so many voices and thoughts
swirling around her, she’ll be useless.
And so long as we stay out of her path,
give her no reason to prod, she won’t
know a thing. The same goes for the
Eagrie eyes. They won’t be looking
ahead for trouble, and so they won’t see
it.” He turns back to Farley, his spine
straight as an arrow. “Silvers might be
strong, but we are not invincible. It can
be done.”
     Farley nods smoothly, smiling with
her teeth. “We’ll be in contact again,
once things are set in motion.”
    “Can I ask something in return?” I
blurt, reaching out to grab her arm. “My
friend, the one I came to you about
before, wants to join the Guard. But you
can’t let him. Just make sure he doesn’t
get involved in any of this.”
    Gently, she peels my fingers from
her arm as regret clouds her eyes.
    “I hope you don’t mean me.”
    To my horror, one of her shadowy
guards steps forward. The red rag
around his face doesn’t hide the set of
his broad shoulders or the ratty shirt I’ve
seen a thousand times. But the steely
look in his eyes, the determination of a
man twice his age, is something I don’t
recognize at all. Kilorn looks years
away already. Scarlet Guard to the bone,
willing to fight and die for the cause.
He’s Red as the dawn.
    “No,” I whisper, drawing back from
Farley. Now I can only see Kilorn
running full speed toward his doom.
“You know what happened to Shade.
You can’t do this.”
    He pulls away the rag and reaches
out to embrace me, but I step away. His
touch feels like a betrayal. “Mare, you
don’t have to keep trying to save me.”
    “I will as long as you won’t.” How
can he expect to be anything but a human
shield? How can he do this? Far away,
something hums at me, growing louder
by the second, but I barely notice. I’m
more focused on keeping the tears from
falling in front of Farley and the Guard
and Maven.
     “Kilorn, please.”
     He darkens at my words, like they’re
an insult rather than a young girl’s plea.
     “You made your choice, and I’m
making mine.”
     “I made the choice for you, to keep
you safe,” I snap. It’s amazing how
easily we fall back into our old rhythm,
bickering like always. But there’s much
more on the line now. I can’t just shove
him into the mud and walk away. “I
bargained for you.”
     “You’re doing what you think will
protect me, Mare,” he mutters, his voice
a low rumble. “So let me do what I can
to save you.”
    My eyes squeeze shut, letting my
heartache take over. I’ve been protecting
Kilorn every day since his mother left,
since he almost starved to death in my
doorway. And now he won’t let me, no
matter how dangerous the future has
become.
    Slowly, I open my eyes again.
    “Do what you want, Kilorn.” My
voice is cold and mechanical, like the
wires and circuits trying to switch back
on. “The power’s coming back soon. We
should be on the move.”
    The others spring into action,
disappearing into the conservatory, and
Walsh takes me by the arm. Kilorn backs
away, following the others into the
shadows, but his eyes stay on me.
     “Mare,” he calls after me. “At least
say good-bye.”
     But I’m already walking, Maven by
my side, Walsh leading us both. I won’t
look back, not now when he’s betrayed
all I’ve ever done for him.

Time moves slowly when you’re waiting
for something good, so naturally the days
fly by as the dreaded ball approaches. A
week passes without any contact,
leaving Maven and me in the dark as the
hours march on. More Training, more
Protocol, more brainless lunches that
almost leave me in tears. Every time I
have to lie, to praise the Silvers and rip
down my own. Only the Guard keeps me
strong.
    Lady Blonos scolds me for being
distracted in Protocol. I don’t have the
heart to tell her that, distracted or not,
I’ll never be able to learn the dance
steps she’s trying to teach for the Parting
Ball. As suited as I might be to sneaking,
I’m horrible with rhythmic motion.
Meanwhile, the once dreaded Training
is an outlet for all my anger and stress,
allowing me to run or spark off
everything I’m trying to keep inside.
    But just when I’m finally beginning
to get the hang of things, the mood of
Training shifts drastically. Evangeline
and her lackeys don’t snipe at me,
instead focusing intently on their warm-
ups. Even Maven goes through his
stretches more carefully, like he’s
preparing for something.
    “What’s going on?” I ask him,
nodding to the rest of the class. My eyes
linger on Cal, currently doing push-ups
in perfect form.
    “You’ll see in a minute,” Maven
replies, his voice oddly dull.
    When Arven enters with Provos,
even he has a strange spring in his step.
He doesn’t bark out an order to run and
approaches the class instead.
    “Tirana,” Instructor Arven murmurs.
    A girl in a blue-striped suit, the
nymph from House Osanos, jumps to
attention. She makes her way toward the
center of the floor, waiting for
something. She looks equal parts excited
and terrified.
    Arven turns, searching through us.
For a second, his eyes linger on me but
thankfully shift to Maven.
    “Prince Maven, if you please.” He
gestures to where Tirana waits.
    Maven nods and moves to stand
beside her. Both of them tense, fingers
twitching as they await whatever’s
coming.
    Suddenly, the training floor moves
around them, pushing clear walls up to
form something. Again, Provos raises
his arms, using his abilities to transform
the training hall. As the structure takes
shape, my heart hammers, realizing
exactly what it is.
    An arena.
    Cal takes Maven’s place at my side,
his movements quick and silent. “They
won’t hurt each other,” he explains.
“Arven stops us before anyone can do
real damage, and there are healers on
hand.”
    “Comforting,” I choke out.
    In the center of the quickly forming
arena, both Maven and Tirana prepare
for their match. Maven’s bracelet
sparks, and fire blazes in his hands,
streaking up his arms, while droplets of
moisture leech from the air to swirl
around Tirana in a ghostly display. Both
of them look ready for battle.
    Something about my unease sets Cal
on edge. “Is Maven the only thing you’re
worried about?”
    Not even close. “Protocol’s not
exactly easy right now.” I’m not lying,
but on my list of problems, learning to
dance is at the very bottom. “It seems
I’m even worse at dancing than
memorizing court etiquette.”
    To my surprise, Cal laughs loudly.
“You must be horrible.”
    “Well, it’s difficult to learn without
a partner,” I snap, bristling at him.
    “Indeed.”
    The last two pieces lock together,
completing the training arena and fencing
in Maven and his opponent. Now they’re
separated from the rest of us by thick
glass, trapped together in a miniature
version of a battle arena. The last time I
watched Silvers fight, someone almost
died.
    “Who has the advantage?” Arven
says, questioning the class. Every hand
but mine shoots into the air. “Elane?”
    The Haven girl juts her chin
forward, speaking proudly. “Tirana has
the advantage. She is older and more
experienced.” Elane says this like it’s
the most obvious thing in the world.
Maven’s cheeks flush white, though he
tries to hide it. “And water defeats fire.”
    “Very good.” Arven shifts his eyes
back to Maven, daring him to argue. But
Maven holds his tongue, letting the
growing fire speak for him. “Impress
me.”
     They collide, spitting fire and rain in
a duel of the elements. Tirana uses her
water like a shield, and to Maven’s fiery
attacks, it’s impenetrable. Every time he
gets close to her, swinging with flaming
fists, he comes back with nothing but
steam. The battle looks even, but
somehow Maven seems to have the
edge. He’s on the offensive, backing her
into a wall.
     All around us, the class cheers,
goading on the warriors. I used to be
disgusted by displays like this, but now
I’m having a hard time keeping quiet.
Every time Maven attacks, closer to
pinning down Tirana, it’s all I can do not
to cheer with the others.
    “It’s a trap, Mavey,” Cal whispers,
more to himself than anyone.
    “What is it? What’s she going to
do?”
    Cal shakes his head. “Just watch.
She’s got him.”
    But Tirana looks anything but
victorious. She’s flat against the wall,
dueling hard behind her watery shield as
she blocks blow after blow.
    I don’t miss the lightning-quick
moment as Tirana literally turns the tide
on Maven. She grabs his arm and pulls,
spinning around so they trade places in a
heartbeat. Now it’s Maven behind her
shield, pinned between the water and the
wall. But he can’t control the water, and
it presses against him, holding him back
even as he tries to burn it away. The
water only boils, bubbling over his
blazing skin.
    Tirana stands back, watching him
struggle with a smile on her face.
“Yield?”
    A stream of bubbles escapes
Maven’s lips. Yield.
    The water drops from him,
vaporizing back into the air to the sound
of applause. Provos waves a hand again,
and one of the arena walls slides back.
Tirana gives a tiny bow while Maven
trudges out of the circle, a soggy, pouting
mess.
    “I challenge Elane Haven,” Sonya
Iral says sharply, trying to get the words
out before our instructor can pair her
with someone else. Arven nods,
allowing the challenge, before turning
his gaze on Elane. To my surprise, she
smiles and saunters toward the arena,
her long red hair swaying with the
movement.
    “I accept your challenge,” Elane
replies, taking a spot in the center of the
arena. “I hope you’ve learned some new
tricks.”
    Sonya follows, eyes dancing. She
even laughs. “You think I’d tell you if I
did?”
    Somehow they manage to giggle and
smile right up until Elane Haven
disappears entirely and grabs Sonya
around the throat. She chokes, gasping
for air, before twisting in the invisible
girl’s arms and slipping away. Their
match devolves quickly into a deadly,
violent game of cat and invisible mouse.
    Maven doesn’t bother to watch,
angry      with    himself     over   his
performance. “Yes?” he says to Cal, and
his brother launches headfirst into a
hushed lecture. I get the feeling this is
normal.
    “Don’t corner someone better than
you, it makes them more dangerous,” he
says, putting an arm around his brother’s
shoulder. “You can’t beat her with
ability, so beat her with your head.”
     “I’ll keep that in mind,” Maven
mutters, begrudging the advice but taking
it all the same.
     “You’re getting better though,” Cal
murmurs, patting Maven on the shoulder.
He means well but comes off as
patronizing. I’m surprised Maven
doesn’t snap at him—but he’s used to
this, like I was used to Gisa.
     “Thanks, Cal. I think he gets it,” I
say, speaking for Maven.
     His older brother isn’t stupid and
takes the hint with a frown. With nothing
but a backward glance at me, Cal leaves
us to stand with Evangeline. I wish he
wouldn’t, just so I don’t have to watch
her smirk and gloat. Not to mention I get
this strange twist in my stomach every
time he looks at her.
     Once he’s out of earshot, I nudge
Maven with my shoulder. “He’s right,
you know. You have to outsmart people
like that.”
     In front of us, Sonya grabs on to what
seems like air and slams it against the
wall. Silver liquid spatters, and Elane
flutters back into visibility, a trail of
blood streaming from her nose.
     “He’s always right when it comes to
the arena,” he rumbles, strangely upset.
“Just wait and see.”
     Across the arena, Evangeline smiles
at the murderous display between us.
How she can watch her friends bleeding
on the floor, I don’t know. Silvers are
different, I remind myself. Their scars
don’t last. They don’t remember pain .
With skin healers waiting in the wings,
violence has taken on a new meaning for
them. A broken spine, a split stomach, it
doesn’t matter. Someone will always
come to fix you. They don’t know the
meaning of danger or fear or pain. It’s
only their pride that can be truly hurt.
    You are Silver. You are Mareena
Titanos. You enjoy this.
    Cal’s eyes dart between the girls,
studying them like a book or a painting
rather than a moving mass of blood and
bone. Beneath the black cut of his
training suit, his muscles tense, ready for
his turn.
    And when it comes, I understand
what Maven means.
    Instructor Arven pits Cal against two
others, the windweaver Oliver and
Cyrine Macanthos, a girl who turns her
skin to stone. It’s a match in name only.
Despite being outnumbered, Cal toys
with the other two. He incapacitates
them one at a time, trapping Oliver in a
swirl of fire while trading blows with
Cyrine. She looks like a living statue,
made of solid rock rather than flesh, but
Cal’s stronger. His blows splinter her
rocky skin, sending spider cracks
through her body with every punch. This
is just practice to him; he almost looks
bored. He ends the match when the arena
explodes into a churning inferno that
even Maven steps back from. By the
time the smoke and fire clears, both
Oliver and Cyrine have yielded. Their
skin cracks in bits of burned flesh, but
neither cries out.
    Cal leaves them both behind, not
bothering to watch as a skin healer
appears to fix them up. He saved me, he
brought me home, he broke the rules for
me. And he’s a merciless soldier, the
heir to a bloody throne.
    Cal’s blood might be silver, but his
heart is black as burned skin.
    When his eyes trail to mine, I force
myself to look away. Instead of letting
his warmth, his strange kindness confuse
me, I commit the inferno to memory. Cal
is more dangerous than all of them put
together. I cannot forget that.
    “Evangeline, Andros,” Arven clips,
nodding at the pair of them. Andros
deflates, almost annoyed at the prospect
of fighting—and losing—to Evangeline,
but dutifully trudges into the arena. To
my surprise, Evangeline doesn’t budge.
    “No,” she says boldly, planting her
feet.
    When Arven whirls to her, his voice
rises above his usual whisper and it cuts
like a razor. “I beg your pardon, Lady
Samos?”
    She turns her black eyes on me, and
her gaze is sharp as any knife.
    “I challenge Mareena Titanos.”
           SEVENTEEN

“Absolutely not,” Maven rumbles.
“She’s been training for only two weeks;
you’ll cut her apart.”
     In response, Evangeline just shrugs,
letting a lazy smirk rise to her features.
Her fingers dance against her leg, and I
can almost feel them like claws across
my skin.
     “So what if she does?” Sonya breaks
in, and I think I see a gleam of her
grandmother in her eye. “The healers are
here. There’ll be no harm done. Besides,
if she’s going to train with us, she might
as well do it properly, right?”
     No harm done, I scoff in my head.
No harm but my blood exposed for all
to see. My heartbeat thumps in my head,
quickening with every passing second.
Overhead, the lights shine brightly,
illuminating the ring; my blood will be
hard to hide, and they’ll see me for what
I am. The Red, the liar, the thief.
     “I’d like some more time observing
before I get in the ring, if you don’t
mind,” I reply, trying my best to sound
Silver. Instead, my voice quavers.
Evangeline catches it.
     “Too scared to fight?” she goads,
lazily flicking a hand. One of her knives,
a little thing like a tooth of silver, circles
her wrist slowly in open threat. “Poor
little lightning girl.”
     Yes, I want to scream. Yes, I am
scared. But Silvers don’t admit things
like that. Silvers have their pride, their
strength—and nothing else. “When I
fight, I intend to win,” I say instead,
throwing her words back in her face.
“I’m not a fool, Evangeline, and I cannot
win yet.”
     “Training outside the ring can only
get you so far, Mareena,” Sonya purrs,
latching on to my lie with glee. “Don’t
you agree, Instructor? How can she ever
expect to win if she doesn’t try?”
     Arven knows there’s something
different about me, a reason for my
ability and my strength. But what that is,
he cannot fathom, and there’s a glint of
curiosity in his eye. He wants to see me
in the ring as well. And my only allies,
Cal and Maven, exchange worried
glances, wondering how to proceed
across such shaky ground. Didn’t they
expect this? Didn’t they think it would
come to this?
    Or maybe this is what I’ve been
headed for all along. An accidental
death in Training, another lie for the
queen to tell, a fitting death for the girl
who doesn’t belong. It’s a trap I
willingly stepped into.
    The game will be over. And
everyone I love will have lost.
    “Lady Titanos is the daughter of a
dead war hero and you can do nothing
but tease her,” Cal growls, throwing
daggered glances at the girls. They
barely seem to notice, almost laughing at
his poor defense. He might be a born
fighter, but he’s at a loss when it comes
to words.
    Sonya is even more incensed, her sly
nature taking hold. Whereas Cal is a
warrior in the ring, she is a soldier of
speech, and twists his words with
frightening ease. “A general’s daughter
should do well in the ring. If anything,
Evangeline should be afraid.”
    “She wasn’t raised by a general,
don’t be foolish—,” Maven sneers. He’s
much better at this sort of thing, but I
cannot let him win my battles. Not with
these girls.
    “I will not fight,” I say again.
“Challenge someone else.”
    When Evangeline smiles, her teeth
white and sharp, my old instincts ring in
my head like a bell. I barely have time to
drop as her knife burns through the air,
cutting through the spot where my neck
was seconds before.
    “I challenge you,” she snaps, and
another blade flies at my face. More rise
from her belt, ready to cut me to ribbons.
    “Evangeline, stop—,” Maven shouts,
and Cal pulls me to my feet, his eyes
alive with worry. My blood sings,
coursing with adrenaline, my pulse so
loud I almost miss his whispered words.
    “You’re faster. Keep her on the run.
Don’t be afraid .” Another knife blazes
by, this time digging into the ground at
my feet. “Don’t let her see you bleed.”
    Over his shoulder, Evangeline
prowls like a predatory cat, a glittering
storm of knives in her fist. In that instant,
I know nothing and no one will stop her.
Not even the princes. And I cannot give
her the chance to win. I cannot lose.
    A bolt of lightning escapes me,
streaking through the air at my command.
It hits her in the chest and she staggers
back, colliding with the outer wall of the
arena. But instead of looking angry,
Evangeline regards me with glee.
    “This will be quick, little lightning
girl,” she snarls, wiping away a trickle
of silverblood.
    All around, the other students draw
back, glancing between the two of us.
This could be the last time they see me
alive. No, I think again. I cannot lose.
My focus intensifies, deepening my
sense of power until it’s so strong I
hardly notice the walls shifting around
us. With a click, Provos re-forms the
arena, locking us in together, a Red girl
and a smiling Silver monster.
    She grins across at me, and razor-
thin pieces of metal peel off the floor,
shaped to her will. They curl and
shudder and scrape into a living
nightmare. Her usual blades are gone,
tossed aside for a new tactic. The metal
things, creatures of her mind, skitter
across the floor to stop at her feet. Each
one has eight razored legs, sharp and
cruel. They quiver as they wait to be
released, to cut me apart. Spiders. A
horrible crawling sensation prickles my
skin, like they’re already upon me.
    Sparks come to life in my hands,
dancing between my fingers. The lights
flicker as the energy in the room bleeds
into me like water soaking into a sponge.
Power races through me, driven by my
own strength—and by need. I will not
die here.
    On the other side of the wall, Maven
smiles, but his face is pale, afraid. Next
to him, Cal doesn’t move. A soldier
doesn’t blink until the battle is won.
    “Who has the advantage?” Instructor
Arven asks. “Mareena or Evangeline?”
    No one raises a hand. Not even
Evangeline’s friends. Instead, they stare
between us, watching our abilities grow.
    Evangeline’s smile fades into a
sneer. She’s used to being favored, to
being the one everyone’s afraid of. And
now she’s angrier than ever.
    Again, the lights flicker on and off,
as my body hums like an overloaded
wire. In the flashing darkness, her
spiders scrabble over the floor, their
metal legs clanging in terrible harmony.
    And then all I know is fear and
power and the surge of energy in my
veins.
    Darkness and light explode back and
forth, plunging us both into a strange
battle of flickering color. My lightning
bursts through the darkness, streaking
purple and white as it shatters through
spiders at every turn. Cal’s advice
echoes in my head, and I keep moving,
never sticking to one spot on the floor
long enough for Evangeline to hurt me.
She weaves through her spiders, dodging
my sparks as best she can. Jagged metal
tears at my arms, but the leather suit
holds firm. She’s fast, but I’m faster,
even with spiders clawing around my
legs. For a second, her infuriating silver
braid passes through my fingertips,
before she’s out of reach again. But I’ve
got her on the run. I’m winning.
    I hear Maven through the shriek of
metal and cheering classmates, roaring
for me to finish her. The lights flash,
making her hard to spot, but for a brief
moment, I feel what it’s like to be one of
them. To feel strength and power
absolutely, to know you can do what
millions can’t. Evangeline feels like this
every day, and now it’s my turn. I’ll
teach you what it’s like to know fear.
    A fist slams against the small of my
back, shooting pain through the rest of
my body. My knees buckle with the
agony, sending me to the ground.
Evangeline pauses above me, her smile
surrounded by a messy curtain of silver
hair.
    “Like I said,” she snarls. “Quick.”
    My legs move on their own,
swinging out in a maneuver I’ve used in
the back alleys of the Stilts a hundred
times. Even on Kilorn once or twice. My
foot connects with her leg, sweeping it
out from under her, and she crashes to
the floor next to me. I’m on her in a
second, despite the exploding pain in my
back. My hands crackle with hot energy,
even as they collide against her face.
Pain sears through my knucklebones but I
keep going, wanting to see sweet
silverblood.
    “You’ll wish it was quick,” I roar,
bearing down on her.
    Somehow, through her bruising lips,
Evangeline manages to laugh. The sound
melts away, replaced by metallic
screeching. And all around us, the fallen,
electrified spiders twitch to life. Their
metal bodies re-form, weaving together
at the seams, into a ruinous, smoking
beast.
    It skitters with surprising speed,
knocking me off her. I’m the one pinned
now, looking up at the heaving, twisting
shards of metal. The sparks die in my
hands, driven away by fear and
exhaustion. Even the healers won’t be
able to save me after this.
    A razor leg drags across my face,
drawing red, hot blood. I hear myself
scream, not in pain, but defeat. This is
the end.
    And then a blazing arm of fire
knocks the metal monster off me, burning
it into nothing more than a charred black
pile of ash. Strong hands pull me to my
feet and then go to my hair, pulling it
across my face to hide the red mark that
could betray me. I turn in to Maven,
letting him walk me from the training
room. Every inch of me shakes, but he
keeps me steady and moving. A healer
comes my way, but Cal heads him off,
blocking my face from his sight.
     Before the door slams behind us, I
hear Evangeline yelling and Cal’s
usually calm voice yelling right back,
roaring over her like a storm.

My voice breaks when I finally speak
again. “The cameras, the cameras can
see.”
    “Sentinels sworn to my mother man
the cameras, trust me, they aren’t what
we should be worrying about,” Maven
says, almost tripping over his words. He
keeps a tight grip on my arm, like he’s
afraid I might be pulled away from him.
His hand ghosts over my face, wiping
away the blood with his sleeve. If
anyone sees . . .
    “Take me to Julian.”
    “Julian’s a fool,” he mutters.
    Figures appear at the far end of the
hall, a pair of roaming nobles, and he
pushes us down a service passage to
avoid them.
    “Julian knows who I am,” I whisper
back, grabbing on to him. As his grip
tightens, so does mine. “Julian will
know what to do.”
    Maven looks down on me,
conflicted, but finally nods. By the time
we reach Julian’s quarters, the bleeding
has stopped, but my face is still a mess.
    He opens the door on the first knock,
looking his usual haphazard self. To my
surprise, he frowns at Maven.
    “Prince Maven,” he says, bending
into a stiff, almost insulting bow. Maven
doesn’t respond, only pushes me past
Julian into the sitting room beyond.
    Julian has a small set of rooms,
made smaller by darkness and stale air.
The curtains are drawn, blotting out the
afternoon sun, and the floor is slippery
with loose stacks of paper. A kettle
simmers in the corner, on an electric
piece of metal meant to replace a stove.
No wonder I never see him outside of
Lessons; he appears to have everything
he needs right here.
    “What’s going on?” he asks, waving
us to a pair of dusty chairs. Obviously he
doesn’t entertain much. I take a seat, but
Maven refuses, still standing.
    I draw aside my curtain of hair,
revealing the shining red flag of my
identity. “Evangeline got carried away.”
    Julian shifts, uncomfortable on his
own two feet. But it’s not me making him
squirm; it’s Maven. The two glare at
each other, at odds over something I
don’t understand. Finally, he turns his
gaze back on me. “I’m not a skin healer,
Mare. The best I can do is clean you
up.”
    “I told you,” Maven says. “He can’t
do anything.”
    Julian’s lip curls into a snarl. “Find
Sara Skonos,” he snaps, his jaw
tightening as he waits for Maven to
move. I’ve never seen Maven this angry,
not even with Cal. But then, it’s not
anger spilling out from Maven or Julian
— i t’s hate. They absolutely despise
each other.
    “Do it, my prince.” The title sounds
like a curse coming from Julian’s lips.
    Maven finally concedes and slips out
the door.
    “What’s that all about?” I whisper,
gesturing between Julian and the door.
    “Not now,” he says, and tosses me a
white cloth to clean myself with. It stains
a dark red as my blood ruins the fabric.
    “Who’s Sara Skonos?”
    Again, Julian hesitates. “A skin
healer. She’ll take care of you.” He
sighs. “And she’s a friend. A discreet
friend.”
    I didn’t know Julian had friends
beyond me and his books, but I don’t
question him.
    When Maven slips back into the
room a few moments later, I’ve managed
to clean my face properly, though it still
feels sticky and swollen. I’ll have a few
bruises to hide tomorrow, and I don’t
even want to know what my back looks
like now. Gingerly, I touch the growing
lump where Evangeline punched me.
    “Sara’s not . . .” Maven pauses,
mulling over the words. “She’s not who
I would have chosen for this.”
    Before I can ask why, the door
opens, revealing the woman I assume is
Sara. She enters silently, barely raising
her eyes. Unlike the others, the Blonos
blood healers, her age is displayed
proudly on her face, in every wrinkle
and her sunken, hollow cheeks. She
looks to be about Julian’s age, but her
shoulders droop in a way that tells me
her life has felt far longer than his.
    “Nice to meet you, Lady Skonos.”
My voice is calm, like I’m asking about
the weather. It seems my Protocol
lessons might be sinking in after all.
     But Sara doesn’t respond. Instead,
she drops to her knees in front of my
chair and takes my face in her rough
hands. Her touch is cool, like water on a
sunburn, and her fingers trail over the
gash on my cheek with surprising
gentleness. She works diligently, healing
over the other bruises on my face.
Before I can mention my back, she slips
a hand down to the injury, and something
like soothing ice bleeds through the pain.
It’s all over in a few moments, and I feel
like I did when I first came here. Better,
in fact. My old aches and bruises are
completely gone.
    “Thank you,” I say, but again, I get
no response.
    “Thank you, Sara,” Julian breathes,
and her eyes dart to his in a flash of gray
color. Her head bows slightly, in the
tiniest nod. He reaches forward, a hand
brushing her arm as he helps her to her
feet. The two of them move like partners
in a dance, listening to music no one else
can hear.
    Maven’s voice shatters their silence.
“That will be all, Skonos.”
    Sara’s quiet calm melts into barely
concealed anger as she spins out of
Julian’s grip, scrambling for the door
like a wounded animal. The door shuts
behind her with a slam, shaking the
framed maps in their glass prisons. Even
Julian’s hands shake, trembling long
after she’s gone, like he can still feel
her.
    He tries to hide it, but not well:
Julian was in love with her once, and
maybe even still is. He looks at the door
like a man haunted, waiting for her to
come back.
    “Julian?”
    “The longer you’re gone, the more
people will start to talk,” he mutters,
gesturing for us to leave.
    “I agree.” Maven moves to the door,
ready to open it and shove me back out.
    “Are you sure no one saw?” My
hand moves to my cheek, now smooth
and clean.
    Maven pauses, thinking. “No one
who would say anything.”
    “Secrets don’t stay secrets here,”
Julian mutters. His voice quivers with
rare anger. “You know that, Your
Highness.”
    “You should know the difference
between secrets,” Maven snaps, “and
lies.”
    His hand closes around my wrist,
pulling me back out into the hall before I
can bother to ask what’s going on. We
don’t make it far before a familiar figure
stops us.
    “Trouble, dear?”
    Queen Elara, a vision in silk,
addresses Maven. Strangely, she’s
alone, with no Sentinels to guard her.
Her eyes linger on his hand still in mine.
For once, I don’t feel her try to push her
way into my thoughts. She’s in Maven’s
head right now, not mine.
    “Nothing I can’t handle,” Maven
says, tightening his grip on me like I’m
some kind of anchor.
    She raises an eyebrow, not believing
a word he says, but doesn’t question
him. I doubt she really questions anyone;
she knows all the answers.
    “Best hurry up, Lady Mareena, or
you’ll be late for luncheon,” she purrs,
finally turning her ghostly eyes on me.
And then it’s my turn to hold on to
Maven. “And take a little more care in
your Training sessions. Red blood is just
so hard to clean up.”
    “You would know,” I snap,
remembering Shade. “Because no matter
how hard you try to hide it, I see it all
over your hands.”
    Her eyes widen, surprised at my
outburst. I don’t think anyone’s ever
spoken to her this way, and it makes me
feel like a conqueror. But it doesn’t last
long.
    Suddenly my body twitches
backward, throwing itself into the
passage wall with a resounding smack.
She makes me dance like a puppet on
violent strings. Every bone rattles and
my neck cracks, slamming my head back
until I see icy blue stars.
    No, not stars. Eyes. Her eyes.
    “Mother!” Maven shouts, but his
voice sounds far away. “Mother, stop!”
    A hand closes around my throat,
holding me in place as control of my
own body ebbs away. Her breath is
sweet on my face, too sweet to stand.
    “You will not speak to me like that
again,” Elara says, too angry to bother
whispering in my head. Her grip
tightens, and I couldn’t even agree with
her if I wanted to.
    Why doesn’t she just kill me? I
wonder as I gasp for breath. If I’m such
a burden, such a problem, why doesn’t
she just kill me?
    “That’s enough!” Maven roars, the
heat of his anger pulsing through the
passage. Even through the hazy darkness
eating at my vision, I see him pull her off
me with surprising strength and
boldness.
     Her ability’s hold on me breaks,
letting me slump against the wall. Elara
almost stumbles herself, reeling with
shock. Now her glare turns on Maven,
on her own son standing against her.
     “Return to your schedule, Mare.” He
seethes, not breaking eye contact with
his mother. I don’t doubt she’s
screaming in his head, scolding him for
protecting me. “Go!”
     Heat crackles all around, radiating
off his skin, and for a moment I’m
reminded of Cal’s guarded temper. It
seems Maven hides a fire as well, an
even stronger one, and I don’t want to be
around when it explodes.
    As I scramble away, trying to put as
much distance as I can between myself
and the queen, I can’t help but look back
at them. They stare at each other, two
pieces squaring off in a game I don’t
understand.

Back in my room, the maids wait
silently, another gilded dress laid across
their arms. While one slips me into the
spectacle of silk and purple gemstones,
the others fix my hair and makeup. As
usual, they don’t say a word, even
though I look frantic and harried after
such a morning.
    Lunch is a mixed affair. Usually the
women eat together to discuss the
upcoming weddings and all the silly
things rich ladies talk about, but today is
different. We’re back on the terrace
overlooking the river, the red uniforms
of servants floating through the crowd,
but there are far more military uniforms
than ever before. It seems like we’re
dining with a full legion.
    Cal and Maven are there as well,
both glittering in their medals, and they
smile through pleasant conversation
while the king himself shakes hands with
the soldiers. All the soldiers are young,
in gray uniforms cut with silver insignia.
Nothing like the ratty red fatigues my
brothers and any other Reds get when
they’re conscripted. These Silvers are
going to war, yes, but not to the real
fighting. They’re the sons and daughters
of important people, and to them, the
war is just another place to visit.
Another step in their training. To us, to
me once, it is a dead end. It is doom.
    But I still have to do my duty, to
smile and shake their hands and thank
them for their brave service. Each word
tastes bitter, until I have to duck away
from the crowd to an alcove half hidden
by plants. The noise of the crowd still
rises with the midday sun, but I can
breathe again. For a second, at least.
    “Everything okay?”
    Cal stands over me, looking worried
but strangely relaxed. He likes being
around soldiers; I suppose it’s his
natural habitat.
    Even though I want to disappear, my
spine straightens. “I’m not a fan of
beauty pageants.”
    He frowns. “Mare, they’re going to
the front. I’d think you of all people
would want to give them a proper send-
off.”
    The laugh escapes me like gunfire.
“What part of my life makes you think
I’d care about these brats going off to
war like it’s some kind of vacation?”
    “Just because they’ve chosen to go
doesn’t make them any less brave.”
    “Well, I hope they enjoy their
barracks and supplies and reprieves and
all the things my brothers were never
given.” I doubt these willing soldiers
will ever want for so much as a button.
    Even though he looks like he wants
to yell at me, Cal swallows the urge.
Now that I know what his temper is
capable of, I’m surprised he can keep
himself in check at all.
    “This is the first completely Silver
legion going into the trenches,” he says
evenly. “They’re going to fight with the
Reds, dressed as Reds, serving with
Reds. The Lakelanders won’t know who
they are when they get to the Choke. And
when the bombs fall, when the enemy
tries to break the line, they’re going to
get more than they bargained for. The
Shadow Legion will take them all.”
    Suddenly I feel hot and cold at the
same time. “Original.”
    But Cal doesn’t gloat. Instead, he
looks sad. “You gave me the idea.”
    “What?”
    “When you fell into Queenstrial, no
one knew what to do. I’m sure the
Lakelanders will feel the same.”
    Though I try to speak, no sound
comes out. I’ve never been a point of
inspiration for anything, let alone combat
maneuvers. Cal stares at me like he
wants to say more, but he doesn’t speak.
Neither of us knows what to say.
    A boy from our training, the
windweaver Oliver, claps a hand on
Cal’s shoulder while the other clutches a
sloshing drink. He wears a uniform too.
He’s going to fight.
    “What’s with the hiding, Cal?” He
chuckles, gesturing to the crowd around
us. “Next to the Lakelanders, this bunch
will be easy!”
    Cal meets my eyes, a silver blush
tingeing his cheeks. “I’ll take the
Lakelanders any day,” he replies, his
eyes never leaving mine.
    “You’re going with them?”
    Oliver answers for Cal, smiling
much too wide for a boy going off to
war. “Going?” he says. “Cal’s leading
us! His own legion, all the way to the
front.”
    Slowly, Cal shifts out of Oliver’s
grip. The drunk windweaver doesn’t
seem to notice and keeps babbling.
“He’ll be the youngest general in history
and the first prince to fight on the lines.”
    And the first to die, a morose voice
in my head whispers. Against my better
instincts, I reach out to Cal. He doesn’t
pull away from me, allowing me to hold
his arm. Now he doesn’t look like a
prince or a general or even a Silver, but
that boy at the bar, the one who wanted
to save me.
    My voice is small but strong.
“When?”
    “When you leave for the capital,
after the ball. You’ll go south,” he
murmurs, “and I’ll go north.”
    A cold shock of fear ripples through
me, like when Kilorn first told me he
was going to fight. But Kilorn is a fisher
boy, a thief, someone who knows how to
survive, how to slip through the cracks;
not like Cal. He’s a soldier. He’ll die if
he has to. He’ll bleed for his war. And
why this frightens me, I don’t know. Why
I care, I can’t say.
    “With Cal on the lines, this war will
finally be over. With Cal, we can win,”
Oliver says, grinning like a fool. Again,
he takes Cal by the shoulder, but this
time he steers him away, back toward
the party—leaving me behind.
    Someone presses a cold drink into
my hand, and I down it in a single gulp.
    “Easy there,” Maven mutters. “Still
thinking about this morning? No one saw
your face, I checked with the Sentinels.”
     But that’s the farthest thing from my
mind as I watch Cal shake hands with
his father. He pastes a magnificent smile
on his face, donning a mask only I can
see through.
     Maven follows my gaze and my
thoughts. “He wanted to do this. It was
his choice.”
     “That doesn’t mean we have to like
it.”
     “My son the general!” King Tiberias
booms, his proud voice cutting through
the din of the party. For a second, when
he pulls Cal close, putting an arm around
his son, I forget he’s a king. I almost
understand Cal’s need to please him.
    What would I give to see my mother
look at me like that, back when I was
nothing but a thief? What would I give
now?
    This world is Silver, but it is also
gray. There is no black-and-white.

When someone knocks at my door that
night, long after dinner, I’m expecting
Walsh and another cup of secret-
message tea, but Cal stands there
instead. Without his uniform or armor,
he looks like the boy he is. Barely
nineteen, on the edge of doom or
greatness or both.
    I shrink in my pajamas, wishing very
much for a robe. “Cal? What do you
need?”
    He shrugs, smirking a little bit.
“Evangeline almost killed you in the ring
today.”
    “So?”
    “So I don’t want her to kill you on
the dance floor.”
    “Did I miss something? Are we
going to be fighting at the ball?”
    He laughs, leaning against the
doorframe. But his feet never enter my
room, like he can’t. Or he shouldn’t.
You’re going to be his brother’s wife.
And he’s going to war.
    “If you know how to dance properly,
you won’t have to.”
    I remember mentioning how I can’t
dance for my life, let alone under
Blonos’s terrible direction, but how can
Cal help me here? And why would he
want to?
    “I’m a surprisingly good teacher,” he
adds, smiling crookedly. When he
stretches out a hand to me, my body
shivers.
    I know I shouldn’t. I know I should
shut the door and not go down this road.
    But he’s leaving to fight, maybe to
die.
    Shaking, I put my hand in his and let
him pull me out of my room.
            EIGHTEEN

Moonlight falls on the floor, bright
enough for us to see by. In the silvery
light, the red blush in my skin is barely
visible—I look the same as a Silver.
Chairs scrape along the wood floor as
Cal rearranges the sitting room, clearing
space for us to practice. The chamber is
secluded, but the hum of cameras is
never far away. Elara’s men are
watching, but no one comes to stop us.
Or rather, to stop Cal.
    He pulls a strange device, a little
box, out of his jacket and sets it in the
middle of the floor. He stares at it
expectantly, waiting for something.
    “Can that thing teach me how to
dance?”
    He shakes his head, still smiling.
“No, but it’ll help.”
    Suddenly, a pulsing beat explodes
from the box, and I realize it’s a speaker,
like the ones in the arena back home.
Only this is for music, not battle. Life,
not death.
    The melody is light and quick, like a
heartbeat. Across from me, Cal smiles
wider, and his foot taps in time. I can’t
resist, my own toes wiggling with the
music. It’s so bouncy and upbeat, not at
all like the cold, metallic music of
Blonos’s classroom or the sorrowful
songs of home. My feet slide along,
trying to remember the steps Lady
Blonos taught me.
     “Don’t worry about that, just keep
moving.” Cal laughs. A drumbeat trills
over the music, and he spins, humming
along. For the first time, he looks like he
doesn’t have the weight of a throne on
his shoulders.
     I feel it too as my fears and worries
lift, if only for a few minutes. This is a
different kind of freedom, like flying
along on Cal’s cycle.
     Cal’s much better at this than me, but
he still looks like a fool; I can only
imagine how idiotic I must appear. Still,
I’m sad when the song ends. As the notes
fade away into the air, it feels like I’m
falling     back     to    reality. Cold
understanding creeps through me; I
shouldn’t be here.
     “This probably isn’t the best idea,
Cal.”
     He cocks his head, pleasantly
confused. “Why’s that?”
     He’s really going to make me say it .
“I’m not even supposed to be alone with
Maven.” I stumble over the words,
feeling myself flush. “I don’t know if
dancing with you in a dark room is
exactly okay.”
     Instead of arguing, Cal just laughs
and shrugs. Another song, slower with a
haunting tune, fills the room. “The way I
see it, I’m doing my brother a favor.”
Then he grins crookedly. “Unless you
want to step on his feet all night?”
    “I have excellent footing, thank you
very much,” I say, crossing my arms.
    Slowly, softly, he takes my hand.
“Maybe in the ring,” he says. “The dance
floor, not so much.” I look down to
watch his feet, moving in time with the
music. He pulls me along, forcing me to
follow, and, despite my best efforts, I
stumble against him.
    He smiles, happy to prove me
wrong. He’s a soldier at heart, and
soldiers like to win. “This is the same
timing as most of the songs you’ll hear at
the ball. It’s a simple dance, easy to
learn.”
    “I’ll find some way to mess it up,” I
grumble, allowing him to push me
around the floor. Our feet trace a rough
box, and I try not to think about his
closeness, or the calluses of his hands.
To my surprise, they feel like mine:
rough with years of work.
    “You might,” he murmurs, all his
laughter gone.
    I’m used to Cal being taller than me,
but he seems smaller tonight. Maybe it’s
the darkness, or maybe it’s the dance. He
seems like he did when I first met him;
not a prince but a person.
    His eyes linger on my face, tracing
over where my wound was. “Maven
fixed you up nicely.” There’s an odd
bitterness to his voice.
    “It was Julian. Julian and Sara
Skonos.” Though Cal doesn’t react as
strongly as Maven did, his jaw tightens
all the same. “Why don’t you two like
her?”
    “Maven has his reasons, good
reasons,” he mumbles. “But it’s not my
story to tell. And I don’t dislike Sara. I
just don’t—I don’t like thinking about
her.”
    “Why? What’s she done to you?”
    “Not to me,” he sighs. “She grew up
with Julian, and my mother.” His voice
drops at the mention of his mom. “She
was her best friend. And when she died,
Sara didn’t know how to grieve. Julian
was a wreck, but Sara . . .” He trails off,
wondering how to continue. Our steps
slow until we stop, frozen as the music
echoes around us.
    “I don’t remember my mother,” he
says sharply, trying to explain himself. “I
wasn’t even a year old when she died. I
only know what my father tells me, and
Julian. And neither of them like to talk
about her at all.”
    “I’m sure Sara could tell you about
her, if they were best friends.”
    “Sara Skonos can’t speak, Mare.”
    “At all?”
    Cal continues slowly, in the level,
calm voice his father uses. “She said
things she shouldn’t have, terrible lies,
and she was punished for it.”
    Horror bleeds through me. Can’t
speak. “What did she say?”
    In a single heartbeat, Cal goes cold
under my fingers. He draws back,
stepping out of my arms as the music
finally dies. With quick motions, he
pockets the speaker, and there is nothing
but our beating hearts to fill the silence.
    “I don’t want to talk about her
anymore.” He breathes heavily. His eyes
seem oddly bright, flickering between
me and the windows full of moonlight.
    Something twists in my heart; the
pain in his voice hurts me. “Okay.”
    With quick, deliberate steps, he
moves toward the door like he’s trying
very hard not to run. But when he turns
back around and faces me across the
room, he looks the same as usual—calm,
collected, detached.
    “Practice your steps,” he says,
sounding very much like Lady Blonos.
“Same time tomorrow.” And then he’s
gone, leaving me alone in a room full of
echoes.
    “What the hell am I doing?” I mutter
to no one but myself.

I’m halfway to my bed before I realize
something is very wrong with my room:
the cameras are off. Not a single one
hums at me, seeing with electric eyes,
recording everything I do. But unlike the
outage before, everything else around me
still buzzes along. Electricity still pulses
through the walls, to every room but
mine.
    Farley.
    But instead of the revolutionary,
Maven steps out of the darkness. He
throws aside the curtains, letting in
enough moonlight to see by.
    “Late-night walk?” he says with a
bitter smile.
    My mouth falls open, struggling for
words. “You know you’re not supposed
to be in here.” I force a smile, hoping to
calm myself. “Lady Blonos will be
scandalized. She’ll punish us both.”
    “Mother’s men owe me a favor or
two,” he says, pointing to where the
cameras are hidden. “Blonos won’t have
evidence to convict.”
    Somehow that doesn’t comfort me.
Instead, I feel shivers run over my skin.
Not in fear though, but anticipation. The
shivers deepen, electrifying my nerves
like my lightning as Maven takes
measured steps toward me.
     He watches me blush with what
looks like satisfaction. “Sometimes I
forget,” he murmurs, letting a hand touch
my cheek. It lingers, like he can feel the
color that pulses in my veins. “I wish
they wouldn’t have to paint you up every
day.”
     My skin buzzes under his fingers, but
I try to ignore it. “That makes two of us.”
     His lips twist, trying to form a smile,
but it just won’t come.
     “What’s wrong?”
     “Farley made contact again.” He
draws back, shoving his hands into his
pockets to hide trembling fingers. “You
weren’t here.”
    Just my luck. “What did she say?”
    Maven shrugs. He walks to the
window, staring out at the night sky.
“She spent most of her time asking
questions.”
    Targets. She must’ve pressed him
again, asking for information Maven
didn’t want to give. I can tell by the
droop of his shoulders, the tremor in his
voice, that he said more than he wanted
to. A lot more.
    “Who?” My mind flies to the many
Silvers I’ve met here, the ones who have
been kind to me, in their own way.
Would any of them be a sacrifice to her
revolution? Who would be marked?
    “Maven, who did you give up?”
    He spins around, a ferocity I’ve
never seen flashing in his eyes. For a
second, I’m afraid he might burst into
flames. “I didn’t want to do it, but she’s
right. We can’t sit still; we have to act.
And if that means I’m going to give her
people, I’m going to do it. I won’t like it,
but I will. And I have.”
    Like Cal, he draws a shaky breath in
an attempt to calm himself. “I sit on
councils with my father, for taxes and
security and defense. I know who will
be missed by my—by the Silvers. I gave
her four names.”
    “Who?”
    “Reynald Iral. Ptolemus Samos.
Ellyn Macanthos. Belicos Lerolan.”
    A sigh escapes me, before I feel
myself nod. These deaths will not be
hidden. Evangeline’s brother, the
colonel—they will be missed indeed.
“Colonel Macanthos knew your mother
was lying. She knows about the other
attacks—”
    “She commands a half legion and
heads the war council. Without her, the
front will be a mess for months.”
    “The front?” Cal. His legion.
    Maven nods. “My father will not
send his heir to war after this. An attack
so close to home, I doubt he’ll even let
him out of sight of the capital.”
    So her death will save Cal. And help
the Guard.
    Shade died for this. His cause is
mine now.
    “Two birds with one stone,” I
breathe, feeling hot tears threaten to fall.
As difficult as this might be, I’ll trade
her life for Cal’s. I’ll do it a thousand
times.
    “Your friend’s part of this too.”
    My knees shake, but I manage to
keep myself upright. I alternate between
anger and fear as Maven explains the
plan with a heavy, hardened heart.
    “And what if we fail?” I ask when he
finishes, finally speaking aloud the
words he’s been skirting around.
    He barely shakes his head. “That
won’t happen.”
    “But what if we do?” I’m not a
prince, my life has not been charming. I
know to expect the worst out of
everything and everyone. “What happens
if we fail, Maven?”
    His breath rattles in his chest as he
inhales, fighting to remain calm. “Then
we’ll be traitors, both of us. Tried for
treason, convicted—and killed.”

During my next lesson with Julian, I
can’t concentrate. I can’t focus on
anything but what’s coming. So much can
go wrong, and so much is at stake. My
life, Kilorn’s, Maven’s—we’re all
putting our necks on the line for this.
    “It’s really not my business, but,”
Julian begins, his voice startling me,
“you seem, well, very attached to
Prince Maven.”
    I almost laugh in relief, but I can’t
help but feel stung at the same time.
Maven’s the last person I should be
wary of in this pit of snakes. Just the
suggestion makes me bristle. “I am
engaged to him,” I reply, trying my best
not to snap.
    But instead of letting it drop, Julian
leans forward. His placid demeanor
usually soothes me, but today it’s nothing
but frustrating. “I’m just trying to help
you. Maven is his mother’s son.”
    This time I really do snap. “You
don’t know a thing about him.” Maven’s
my friend. Maven’s risking more than
me. “Judging him by his parents is like
judging me for my blood. Just because
you hate the king and queen doesn’t
mean you can hate him too.”
    Julian stares at me, his gaze level
and full of fire. When he speaks, his
voice sounds more like a growl. “I hate
the king because he couldn’t save my
sister, because he replaced her with that
viper. I hate the queen because she
ruined Sara Skonos, because she took
the girl I loved and broke her apart.
Because she cut Sara’s tongue out.” And
then lower, a lament, “She had such a
beautiful voice.”
    A wave of nausea washes over me.
Suddenly Sara’s painful silence, her
sunken cheeks make sense. No wonder
Julian had her heal me; she couldn’t tell
anyone the truth.
    “But”—my words are small and
hoarse, like it’s my voice being taken
away—“she’s a healer.”
    “Skin healers can’t heal themselves.
And no one would cross the queen’s
punishment. So Sara has to live like that,
shamed, forever.” His voice echoes with
memories, each one worse than the last.
“Silvers don’t mind pain, but we are
proud. Pride, dignity, honor—those are
things no ability can replace.”
    As terrible as I feel for Sara, I can’t
help but fear for myself. They cut her
tongue out for something she said.
What will they possibly do to me?
    “You forget yourself, little lightning
girl.”
    The nickname feels like a slap in the
face, shocking me back to reality.
    “This world is not your own.
Learning to curtsy has not changed that.
You don’t understand the game we’re
playing.”
    “Because this isn’t a game, Julian.” I
push his book of records toward him,
shoving the list of dead names into his
lap. “This is life and death. I’m not
playing for a throne or a crown or a
prince. I’m not playing at all. I’m
different.”
    “You are,” he murmurs, running a
finger over the pages. “And that’s why
you’re in danger, from everyone. Even
Maven. Even me. Anyone can betray
anyone.”
    His mind drifts, and his eyes cloud
over. In this light he looks old and gray,
a bitter man haunted by a dead sister, in
love with a broken woman, doomed to
teach a girl who can do nothing but lie.
Over his shoulder, I glimpse the map of
what was, of before. This whole world
is haunted.
    And then, the worst thought I’ve ever
had comes. Shade is already my ghost.
Who else will join him?
    “Make no mistake, my girl,” he
finally breathes. “You are playing the
game as someone’s pawn.”
    I don’t have the heart to argue. Think
what you want, Julian. I’m no one’s
fool.

Ptolemus Samos. Colonel Macanthos.
Their faces dance in my head as Cal and
I spin across the floor of the sitting
room. Tonight the moon is shrinking,
fading away, but my hope has never been
stronger. The ball is tomorrow, and
afterward, well, I’m not sure where that
path might go. But it will be a different
path, a new road to lead us toward a
better future. There will be collateral
damage, injuries and deaths we can’t
avoid, as Maven put it. But we know the
risks. If all goes to plan, the Scarlet
Guard will have raised its flag where
everyone can see. Farley will broadcast
another video after the attack, detailing
our        demands. Equality,      liberty,
freedom. Next to all-out rebellion, it
sounds like a good deal.
    My body dips, moving toward the
floor in a slow arc that makes me yelp.
Cal’s strong arms close around me,
pulling me back up in an easy second.
    “Sorry,” he says, half embarrassed.
“Thought you were ready for it.”
    I’m not ready. I’m scared . I force
myself to laugh, to hide what I can’t
show him. “No, my fault. Mind
wandered off again.”
    He isn’t easy to chase off and dips
his head a little, looking me in the eyes.
“Still worried about the ball?”
    “More than you know.”
    “One step at a time, that’s the best
you can do.” Then he laughs at himself,
moving us back into simpler steps. “I
know it’s hard to believe, but I wasn’t
always the best dancer either.”
    “How shocking,” I answer, matching
his smile. “I thought princes were born
with the ability to dance and make idle
conversation.”
    He chuckles again, quickening our
pace with the movement. “Not me. If I
had my way, I’d be in the garage or the
barracks, building and training. Not like
Maven. He’s twice the prince I’ll ever
be.”
    I think of Maven, of his kind words,
perfect manners, impeccable knowledge
of court—all the things he pretends to be
to hide his true heart. Twice the prince
indeed. “But he’ll only ever be a
prince,” I mutter, almost lamenting at the
thought. “And you’ll be king.”
    His voice drops to meet my own,
and something dark shadows his gaze.
There’s a sadness in him, growing
stronger every day. Maybe he doesn’t
like war as much as I think. “Sometimes
I wish it didn’t have to be that way.”
    He speaks softly, but his voice fills
my head. Though the ball looms on
tomorrow’s horizon, I find myself
thinking more about him and his hands
and the faint smell of wood smoke that
seems to follow Cal wherever he goes.
It makes me think of warmth, of autumn,
of home.
    I blame my rapidly beating heart on
the melody, the music that brims with so
much life. Somehow this night reminds
me of Julian’s lessons, his histories of
the world before our own. That was a
world of empires, of corruption, of war
—and more freedom than I’ve ever
known. But the people of that time are
gone, their dreams in ruin, existing only
in smoke and ash.
    It’s our nature , Julian would say.
We destroy. It’s the constant of our
kind. No matter the color of blood, man
will always fall.
    I didn’t understand that lesson a few
days ago, but now, with Cal’s hands in
mine, guiding me with the lightest touch,
I’m beginning to see what he meant.
    I can feel myself falling.
    “Are you really going to go with the
legion?” Even the words make me
afraid.
    He barely nods. “A general’s place
is with his men.”
    “A prince’s place is with his
princess. With Evangeline,” I add
hastily. Good one, Mare, my mind
screams.
    The air around us thickens with heat,
though Cal doesn’t move at all. “She’ll
be all right, I think. She’s not exactly
attached to me. I won’t miss her either.”
    Unable to meet his gaze, I focus on
what’s right in front of me.
Unfortunately, that happens to be his
chest and a much-too-thin shirt. Above
me, he takes a ragged breath.
    Then his fingers are under my chin,
tipping my head up to meet his gaze.
Gold flame flickers in his eyes,
reflecting the heat beneath. “I’ll miss
you, Mare.”
    As much as I want to stand still, to
stop time and let this moment last
forever, I know it’s not possible.
Whatever I might feel or think, Cal is not
the prince I’m promised to. More
important, he’s on the wrong side. He’s
my enemy. Cal is forbidden.
    So with hesitant, reluctant steps, I
back away, out of his grasp and out of
the circle of warmth I’ve gotten so used
to.
    “I can’t,” is all I can manage, though
I know my eyes betray me. Even now I
can feel tears of anger and regret, tears I
swore not to cry.
    But maybe the prospect of going off
to war has made Cal bold and reckless,
things he never was before. He takes me
by the hand, pulling me to him. He’s
betraying his only brother. I’m betraying
my cause, Maven, and myself, but I don’t
want to stop.
    Anyone can betray anyone.
    His lips are on mine, hard and warm
and pressing. The touch is electrifying,
but not like I’m used to. This isn’t a
spark of destruction but a spark of life.
     As much as I want to pull away, I
just can’t do it. Cal is a cliff, and I throw
myself over the edge, not bothering to
think of what it could do to us both. One
day he’ll realize I’m his enemy, and all
this will be a far-gone memory. But not
yet.
            NINETEEN

It takes hours to paint and polish me
into the girl I’m supposed to be, but it
seems like just a few minutes. When the
maids stand me up in front of the mirror,
silently asking for my approval, I can
only nod at the girl staring back at me
from the glass. She looks beautiful and
terrified by what’s to come, wrapped in
shimmering silk chains. I have to hide
her, the scared girl; I have to smile and
dance and look like one of them. With
great effort, I push my fear away. Fear
will get me killed.
    Maven waits for me at the end of the
hall, a shadow in his dress uniform. The
charcoal black makes his eyes stand out,
vibrantly blue against pale white skin.
He doesn’t look scared at all, but then,
he’s a prince. He’s Silver. He won’t
flinch.
    He extends an arm toward me, and I
gladly take it. I expect him to make me
feel safe or strong or both, but his touch
reminds me of Cal and our betrayal. Last
night comes into sharper focus, until
every breath stands out in my head. For
once, Maven doesn’t notice my unease.
He’s thinking about more important
things.
    “You look beautiful,” he says
quietly, nodding down at my dress.
    I don’t agree with him. It’s a silly,
overdone thing, a complication of purple
jewels that sparkle whenever I turn,
making me look like a glittery bug. Still,
I’m supposed to be a lady tonight, a
future princess, so I nod and smile
gratefully. I can’t help but remember that
my lips, now smiling for Maven, were
kissing his brother last night.
    “I just want this to be over.”
    “It won’t end tonight, Mare. This
won’t be over for a long time. You know
that, right?” He speaks like someone
much older, much wiser, not like a
seventeen-year-old boy. When I hesitate,
truly not knowing how to feel, his jaw
tightens. “Mare?” he prods, and I can
hear the tremors in his voice.
     “Are you afraid, Maven?” My words
are weak, a whisper. “I am.”
     His eyes harden, shifting into blue
steel. “I’m afraid of failing. I’m afraid of
letting this opportunity pass us by. And
I’m afraid of what happens if nothing in
this world ever changes.” He turns hot
under my touch, driven by an inner
resolve. “That scares me more than
dying.”
     It’s hard not to be swept away by his
words, and I nod along with him. How
can I back out? I will not flinch.
     “Rise,” he murmurs, so low I barely
hear him. Red as the dawn.
     His grip tightens on me as we come
to the hall in front of the lifts. A troop of
Sentinels guards the king and queen, both
waiting for us. Cal and Evangeline are
nowhere to be found, and I hope they
stay away. The longer I don’t have to
look at them together, the happier I’ll be.
    Queen Elara wears a sparkling
monstrosity of red, black, white, and
blue, displaying the colors of her house
and her husband’s. She forces a smile,
staring right through me to her son.
    “Here we go,” Maven says, letting
go of my hand to stand at his mother’s
side. My skin feels strangely cold
without him.
    “So how long do I have to be here?”
He forces a whine into his voice,
playing his part well. The more he can
keep her distracted, the better our
chances. One poke into the wrong head
and everything will go up in smoke. And
get us all killed for good measure.
    “Maven, you can’t just come and go
as you please. You have duties, and
you’ll stay as long as you’re needed.”
She fusses over him, adjusting his collar,
his medals, his sleeves, and for a
moment, it takes me off guard. This is a
woman who invaded my thoughts, who
took me away from my life, who I hate,
and still there’s something good. She
loves her son. And for all her faults,
Maven loves her.
    King Tiberias, on the other hand,
doesn’t seem bothered by Maven at all.
He barely glances his way. “The boy’s
just bored. Not enough excitement in his
day, not like back at the front,” he says,
running a hand over his trimmed beard.
“You need a cause, Mavey.”
    For a brief moment, Maven’s
annoyed mask drops. I have one, his
eyes scream, but he keeps his mouth
shut.
    “Cal’s got his legion, he knows what
he’s doing, what he wants. You need to
figure out what you’re going to do with
yourself, eh?”
    “Yes, Father,” Maven says. Though
he tries to hide it, a shadow crosses his
face.
    I know that look very well. I used to
wear it myself, when my parents would
hint at me to be more like Gisa, even
though that was impossible. I went to
sleep hating myself, wishing I could
change, wishing I could be quiet and
talented and pretty like her. There’s
nothing that hurts more than that feeling.
But the king doesn’t notice Maven’s
pain, just like my parents never noticed
mine.
    “I think helping me fit in here is
cause enough for Maven,” I say, hoping
to draw the king’s disapproving eye
away. When Tiberias turns to me,
Maven sighs and shoots me a grateful
smile.
    “And what a job he’s done,” the king
replies, looking me over. I know he’s
remembering the poor Red girl who
refused to bow to him. “From what I
hear, you’re close to a proper lady
now.”
    But the smile he forces doesn’t reach
his eyes, and there’s no mistaking the
suspicion there. He wanted to kill me
back in the throne room, to protect his
crown and the balance of his country,
and I don’t think the urge will ever fade
away. I’m a threat, but I’m also an
investment. He’ll use me when he wants
and kill me when he must.
    “I’ve had good help, my king.” I
bow, pretending to be flattered, even
though I don’t care what he thinks. His
opinion isn’t worth the rust on my
father’s wheelchair.
    “Are we just about ready?” Cal’s
voice says, shattering my thoughts.
    My body reacts, spinning around to
see him enter the hall. My stomach
churns, but not with excitement or nerves
or any of the things silly girls talk about.
I feel sick with myself, with what I let
happen—with what I wanted to happen.
Though he tries to hold my gaze, I tear
my eyes away, to Evangeline hanging off
his arm. She’s wearing metal again, and
she manages to smirk without moving
her lips.
    “Your Majesties,” she murmurs,
dipping into a maddeningly perfect
curtsy.
    Tiberias smiles at her, his son’s
bride, before clapping a hand down on
Cal’s shoulder. “Just waiting on you,
son,” he chortles.
    When they stand next to each other,
the family resemblance is undeniable—
same hair, same red-gold eyes, even the
same posture. Maven watches, his blue
eyes soft and thoughtful, while his
mother keeps her grip on his arm. With
Evangeline on one side and his father on
the other, Cal can’t do much more than
meet my eyes. He nods slightly, and I
know it’s the only greeting I deserve.

Despite the decorations, the ballroom
looks the same as it did more than a
month ago, when the queen first pulled
me into this strange world, when my
name and identity were officially
stripped away. They struck a blow
against me here, and now it’s my turn to
strike back.
    Blood will spill tonight.
    But I can’t think of that now. I have
to stand with the others, to speak with
the hundred members of court lined up to
trade words with royalty and one
jumped-up Red liar. My eyes flit down
the line, looking for the marked ones—
Maven’s targets given to the Guard, the
sparks to light a fire. Reynald, the
colonel, Belicos—and Ptolemus. The
silver-haired, dark-eyed brother of
Evangeline.
    He is one of the first to greet us,
standing just behind his severe father,
who hurries along to his daughter. When
Ptolemus approaches me, I fight the urge
to be sick. Never have I done anything
so difficult as looking into the eyes of a
dead man walking.
    “My congratulations,” he says, his
voice hard as rock. The hand he extends
is just as firm. He doesn’t wear a
military uniform but a suit of black metal
that fits together in smooth, gleaming
scales. He’s a warrior but not a soldier.
Like his father before him, Ptolemus
leads the Archeon city guard, protecting
the capital with his own army of
officers. The head of a snake, Maven
called him before. Cut him down and
the rest will die. His hawkish eyes are
on his sister, even while he holds my
hand. He lets me go in a hurry, quickly
passing by Maven and Cal before
embracing Evangeline in a rare display
of affection. I’m surprised their stupid
outfits don’t get stuck together.
    If all goes to plan, he’ll never hug
his sister again. Evangeline will have
lost a brother, just like me. Even though I
know that pain firsthand, I can’t bring
myself to feel sorry for her. Especially
not with the way she holds on to Cal.
They look like complete opposites, he in
his simple uniform while she glitters like
a star in a dress of razor spikes. I want
to kill her, I want to be her. But there’s
nothing I can do about that. Evangeline
and Cal are not my problem tonight.
    As Ptolemus disappears and more
people pass with cold smiles and sharp
words, it gets easier to forget myself.
House Iral greets us next, led by the
lithe, languid movements of Ara, the
Panther. To my surprise, she bows lowly
to me, smiling as she does so. But
there’s something strange about it,
something that tells me she knows more
than she lets on. She passes without a
word, sparing me from another
interrogation.
    Sonya follows her grandmother, arm
in arm with another target: Reynald Iral,
her cousin. Maven told me he’s a
financial adviser, a genius who keeps
the army funded with taxes and trade
schemes. If he dies, so does the money,
and so will the war. I’m willing to trade
one tax collector for that. When he takes
my hand, I can’t help but notice his eyes
are frozen and his hands are soft. Those
hands will never touch mine again.
    It’s not as easy to dismiss Colonel
Macanthos when she approaches. The
scar on her face stands out sharply,
especially tonight when everyone seems
so polished. She might not care for the
Guard, but she didn’t believe the queen
either. She wasn’t ready to swallow the
lies being spoon-fed to the rest of us.
    Her grip is strong as she shakes my
hand; for once someone isn’t afraid I’ll
break like glass. “Every happiness to
you, Lady Mareena. I can see this one
suits you.” She jerks her head toward
Maven. “Not like fancy Samos,” she
adds in a playful whisper. “She’ll make
a sad queen, and you a happy princess,
mark my words.”
    “Marked,” I breathe. I manage to
smile, even though the colonel’s life will
soon be at an end. No matter how many
kind words she says, her minutes are
numbered.
    When she moves on to Maven,
shaking his hand and inviting him to
inspect troops with her in a week or so, I
can tell he’s just as affected. After she’s
gone, his hand drops to mine, giving me
a reassuring squeeze. I know he regrets
naming her, but like Reynald, like
Ptolemus, her death will serve a
purpose. Her life will be worth it all, in
the end.
    The next target comes from much
farther down the line, from a lower
house. Belicos Lerolan has a jolly grin,
chestnut hair, and sunset-colored clothes
to match his house colors. Unlike the
others I’ve greeted tonight, he seems
warm and kind. The smile behind his
eyes is as real as his handshake.
    “A pleasure, Lady Mareena.” He
inclines his head in greeting, polite to a
fault. “I look forward to many years in
your service.”
    I smile for him, pretending that there
will be many years to come, but the
facade becomes harder to hold as the
seconds drag on. When his wife appears,
leading a pair of twin boys, I want to
scream. Barely four years old and
yowling like puppies, they clamber
around their father’s legs. He smiles
softly, a private smile just for them.
    A diplomat, Maven called him, an
ambassador to our allies in Piedmont,
far to the south. Without him, our ties to
that country and their army would be cut
off, forcing Norta to stand alone against
our Red dawn. He’s another sacrifice
we must make, another name to throw
away. And he’s a father. He’s a father
and we’re going to kill him.
    “Thank you, Belicos,” Maven says,
holding out his hand for him to shake,
trying to draw the Lerolans away before
I break.
    I try to speak, but I can only think
about the father I’m about to steal from
such young children. In the back of my
mind, I remember Kilorn crying after his
father died. He was young too.
    “Excuse us a minute, wouldn’t you?”
Maven’s voice sounds far away as he
speaks. “Mareena’s still getting used to
the excitement of court.”
    Before I can glance back at the
doomed father, Maven hurries me away.
A few people gawk at us, and I can feel
Cal’s eyes following us out. I almost
stumble, but Maven keeps me upright as
he pushes me out onto a balcony.
Normally the fresh air would cheer me
up, but I doubt anything can help now.
     “Children.” The words rip out of me.
“He’s a father.”
     Maven lets me go, and I slump
against the balcony rail, but he doesn’t
step away. In the moonlight his eyes look
like ice, glowing and glaring into me. He
puts one hand on either side of my
shoulders, trapping me in, forcing me to
listen.
     “Reynald is a father, too. The
Colonel has children of her own.
Ptolemus is now engaged to the Haven
girl. They all have people; they all have
someone who will mourn them.” He
forces out the words; he’s just as torn as
I. “We can’t pick and choose how to
help the cause, Mare. We must do what
we can, whatever the cost.”
    “I can’t do this to them.”
    “You think I want to do this?” he
breathes, his face inches from mine. “I
know them all, and it hurts me to betray
them, but it must be done. Think what
their lives will buy, what their deaths
will accomplish. How many of your
people could be saved? I thought you
understood this!”
    He stops himself, squeezing his eyes
shut for a moment. When he collects
himself, he raises a hand to my face,
tracing the outline of my cheek with
shaking fingers. “I’m sorry, I just—” His
voice falters. “You might not be able to
see where tonight will lead, but I can.
And I know this will change things.”
    “I believe you,” I whisper, reaching
up to hold his hand in my own. “I just
wish it didn’t have to be this way.”
    Over his shoulder, back in the
ballroom, the receiving line dwindles.
The handshakes and pleasantries are
over. The night has truly begun.
    “But it does, Mare. I promise you,
this is what we must do.”
    As much as it hurts, as much as my
heart twists and bleeds, I nod. “Okay.”
    “You two all right out here?”
    For a second, Cal’s voice sounds
strange and high, but he clears his throat
as he pokes out onto the balcony. His
eyes linger on my face. “You ready for
this, Mare?”
    Maven answers for me. “She’s
ready.”
    Together, we walk away from the
railing and the night and the last bit of
quiet we might ever have. As we pass
through the archway, I feel the ghost of a
touch on my arm: Cal. I look back to see
him still staring, fingers outstretched.
His eyes are darker than ever, boiling
with some emotion I can’t place. But
before he can speak, Evangeline appears
at his side. When he takes her by the
hand, I have to tear my eyes away.
    Maven leads us to the cleared spot in
the center of the ballroom. “This is the
hard part,” he says, trying to calm me.
    It works a little bit, and the shivers
running through me ebb away.
     We dance first, the two princes and
their brides, in front of everyone.
Another display of strength and power,
showing off the two girls who won in
front of all the families who lost. Right
now it’s the last thing I want to do, but
it’s for the cause. As the electronic
music I hate clatters to life, I realize it’s
at least a dance I recognize.
     Maven looks shocked when my feet
move into place. “You’ve been
practicing?”
     With your brother. “A bit.”
     “You’re just full of surprises.” He
chuckles, finding the will to smile.
     Next to us, Cal twirls Evangeline
into place. They look like a king and
queen should, regal and cold and
beautiful. When Cal’s eyes meet mine at
the exact moment his hands close around
her fingers, I feel a thousand things at
once, none of them pleasant. But instead
of wallowing, I move closer to Maven.
He glances down at me, blue eyes wide,
as the music takes hold. A few feet
away, Cal takes his steps, leading
Evangeline in the same dance he taught
me. She’s much better at it, all grace and
sharp beauty. Again I feel like falling.
    We spin across the floor in time with
the music, surrounded by cold
onlookers. I recognize the faces now. I
know the houses, the colors, the
abilities, the histories. Who to fear, who
to pity. They watch us with hungry eyes,
and I know why. They think we’re the
future, Cal and Maven and Evangeline
and even me. They think they’re
watching a king and queen, a prince and
princess. But that’s a future I don’t
intend to let happen.
    In my perfect world, Maven won’t
have to hide his heart and I won’t have
to hide who I truly am. Cal will have no
crown to wear, no throne to protect.
These people will have no more walls
to hide behind.
    The dawn is coming for you all.
    We dance through two more songs,
and other couples join us on the floor.
The swirl of color blocks out any
glimpse of Cal and Evangeline, until it
feels like Maven and I are spinning
alone. For a moment, Cal’s face floats in
front of me, replacing his brother’s, and
I think I’m back in the room full of
moonlight.
    But Maven is not Cal, no matter how
much his father might want him to be. He
isn’t a soldier, he won’t be a king, but
he’s braver. And he’s willing to do
what’s right.
    “Thank you, Maven,” I whisper,
barely audible over the horrible music.
    He doesn’t have to ask what I’m
talking about. “You don’t ever have to
thank me.” His voice is strangely deep,
almost breaking as his eyes darken. “Not
for anything.”
    This is the closest I’ve ever been to
him, my nose inches away from his neck.
I can feel his heart beat beneath my
hands, hammering in time with my own.
Maven is his mother’s son , Julian said
once. He couldn’t be more wrong.
    Maven maneuvers us to the edge of
the dance floor, now crowded with
swirling lords and ladies. No one will
notice we’ve stepped away.
    “Some refreshments?” a servant
murmurs, holding out a tray of the fizzy
golden drink. I start to wave him off
before I recognize his bottle-green eyes.
    I have to bite my tongue to keep from
shouting his name aloud. Kilorn.
    Strangely, the red uniform suits him
and for once he managed to clean the dirt
off his face. It seems the fisher boy I
knew is entirely gone.
     “This thing itches,” he grumbles
under his breath. Maybe not entirely.
     “Well, you won’t be in it much
longer,” Maven says. “Is everything in
place?”
     Kilorn nods, his eyes darting through
the crowd. “They’re ready upstairs.”
     Above us, Sentinels crowd a
wraparound landing, lining the walls.
But above them, in the carved window
alcoves and little balconies near the
ceiling, the shadows are not Sentinels at
all.
     “You just have to give the signal.”
He holds out the tray and the innocent
glass of gold.
    Maven straightens next to me, his
shoulder against mine in support.
“Mare?”
    My turn now. “I’m ready,” I murmur,
remembering the plan Maven whispered
to me a few nights ago. Shivering, I let
the familiar buzz of electricity flow
through me, until I can feel every light
and camera blaze through my head. I lift
the glass, and drink deeply.
    Kilorn is quick to take the glass
back. “One minute.” His voice sounds so
final.
    He disappears with a swish of his
tray, moving through the crowd until I
can’t see him anymore. Run, I pray,
hoping he’s fast enough. Maven goes as
well, leaving me to carry out his own
task at his mother’s side.
    I head toward the center of the
crowd even as the feel of electricity
threatens to overtake me. But I can’t let
it go yet. Not until they start. Thirty
seconds.
    King Tiberias looms ahead of me,
laughing away with his favorite son. He
looks to be on his third glass of wine,
and his cheeks are flushed silver, while
Cal sips politely at water. Somewhere to
my left, I hear Evangeline’s cutting
laughter, probably with her brother. All
over the room, four people take their last
breaths.
    I let my heart count out those last
seconds, beating away the moments. Cal
spots me through the crowd, grinning that
smile I love, and starts to come toward
me. But he will never reach me, not
before the deed is done. The world
slows until all I know is the shocking
strength within the walls. Like in
Training, like with Julian, I’m learning
to control it.
    Four shots ring out, paired with four
bright flashes from the guns high above.
    The screams come next.
             TWENTY

I scream with them, and the lights flash,
then flicker, then fail.
    One minute of darkness. That’s what
I need to give them. The screams, the
yelling, the stampede of feet almost
break my concentration, but I force
myself to focus. The lights flash
horribly, then die, making it almost
impossible to move. Making it possible
for my friends to slip away.
    “In the alcoves!” a voice roars,
yelling over the chaos. “They’re
running!” More voices join the call,
though none are familiar. But in this
madness, everyone sounds different.
“Find them!” “Stop them!” “Kill them!”
    The Sentinels on the landing have
their guns aimed while more blur along,
barely shadows as they give chase.
Walsh is with them, I remind myself. If
Walsh and other servants could sneak
Farley and Kilorn in before, they can
sneak them out again. They can hide.
They can escape. They’ll be fine.
    My darkness will save them.
    A blaze of fire erupts from the
crowd, curling through the air like a
flaming snake. It roars overhead,
illuminating    the   dim      ballroom.
Flickering shadows paint the walls and
the upturned faces, transforming the
ballroom into a nightmare of red light
and gunpowder. Sonya screams nearby,
bent over the body of Reynald. The spry
old Ara wrestles her off the corpse,
pulling her away from the chaos.
Reynald’s eyes stare glassily up at the
ceiling, reflecting the red light.
    Still I hold on, every muscle inside
me hard and tense.
    Somewhere near the fire, I recognize
the king’s guards hurrying him from the
room. He tries to fight them, shouting
and yelling to stay, but for once they
don’t follow his orders. Elara is close
behind, pushed on by Maven as they run
from danger. Many more follow, eager
to be free of this place.
    Security officers run against the tide,
flooding the room with shouts and
stamping boots. Lords and ladies press
by me in an attempt to escape, but I can
only stand in place, holding on as best I
can. No one tries to pull me away; no
one notices me at all. They are afraid.
For all their strength, all their power,
they still know the meaning of fear. And
a few bullets are all it takes to bring
terror out in them.
    A weeping woman bumps into me,
knocking me over. I land face-to-face
with a corpse, staring at Colonel
Macanthos’s scar. Silver blood trickles
down her face, from her forehead to the
floor. The bullet hole is strange,
surrounded by gray, rocky flesh. She was
a stoneskin. She was alive long enough
to try and stop it, to shield herself. But
the bullet couldn’t be stopped. She still
died.
    I push back from the murdered
woman, but my hands slide through a
mixture of silverblood and wine. A
scream escapes me in a terrifying
combination of frustration and grief. The
blood clings to my hands, like it knows
what I’ve done. It’s sticky and cold and
everywhere, trying to drown me.
    “MARE!”
    Strong arms pull me along the floor,
dragging me away from the woman I let
die. “Mare, please—,” the voice pleads,
but for what, I don’t know.
    With a roar of frustration, I lose the
battle. The lights return, revealing a war
zone of silk and death. When I try to
scramble to my feet, to make sure the job
is really done, a hand pushes me back
down.
    I say the words I must, playing my
own part in all this. “I’m sorry—the
lights—I can’t—” Overhead, the lights
flicker again.
    Cal barely hears me and drops to his
knees next to me. “Where are you hit?”
he roars, checking me in the way I know
he’s been trained. His fingers feel down
my arms and legs, looking for a wound,
for the source of so much blood.
    My voice sounds strange. Soft.
Broken. “I’m fine.” He doesn’t hear me
again. “Cal, I’m fine.”
    Relief floods his face, and for a
second I think he might kiss me again.
But his senses return quicker than mine.
“You’re sure?”
    Gingerly, I raise a silver-stained
sleeve. “How can this be mine?”
    My blood is not this color. You
know that.
    He nods. “Of course,” he whispers.
“I just—I saw you on the ground and I
thought . . .” His words trail away,
replaced by a terrible sadness in his
eyes. But it fades quickly, shifting to
determination. “Lucas! Get her out of
here!”
    My personal guard charges through
the fray, his gun at the ready. Though he
looks the same in his boots and uniform,
this is not the Lucas I know. His black
eyes, Samos eyes, are dark as night. “I’ll
take her to the others,” he growls,
hoisting me up.
     Though I know better than anyone the
danger is gone, I can’t help but reach out
to Cal. “What about you?”
     He shrugs out of my grasp with
shocking ease. “I’m not running.”
     And then he turns, his shoulders
squared to a group of Sentinels. He steps
over the corpses, head inclined to the
ceiling. A Sentinel tosses him a handgun,
and he catches it deftly, putting a finger
to the trigger. His other hand blazes to
life, crackling with dark and deadly
flame. Silhouetted against the Sentinels
and the bodies on the floor, he looks like
another person entirely.
    “Let’s go hunting,” he growls, and
charges up the stairs. Sentinels and
Security follow, like a cloud of red-and-
black smoke trailing behind his flame.
They leave a a blood-spattered
ballroom, hazy with dust and screams.
    In the center of it all lies Belicos
Lerolan, pierced not by a bullet but a
silver lance. Shot from a spear gun, like
the ones used to fish. A tattered scarlet
sash falls from the shaft, barely stirring
in the whirlwind. There’s a symbol
stamped on it—the torn sun.
    Then the ballroom is gone,
swallowed up by the dark walls of a
service passage. The ground rumbles
beneath our feet and Lucas throws me to
the wall, shielding me. A sound like
thunder reverberates and the ceiling
shakes, dropping pieces of stone down
on us. The door behind us explodes
inward, destroyed by flame. Beyond, the
ballroom is black with smoke. An
explosion.
    “Cal—” I try to squirm away from
Lucas, to run back the way we came, but
he throws me back. “Lucas, we have to
help him!”
    “Trust me, a bomb won’t bother the
prince,” he growls, moving me forward.
    “A bomb?” That wasn’t part of the
plan. “Was that a bomb?”
    Lucas draws back from me,
positively shaking in anger. “You saw
that bloody red scarf. This is the Scarlet
Guard and that”—he points back to the
ballroom, still dark and burning—“that
is who they are.”
    “This doesn’t make sense,” I murmur
to myself, trying to remember every facet
of the plan. Maven never told me about a
bomb. Never. And Kilorn wouldn’t let
me do this, not if he knew I would be in
danger. They wouldn’t do this to me.
    Lucas holsters his gun, his voice a
growl. “Killers don’t have to make
sense.”
    My breath catches in my throat. How
many were left back there? How many
children, how many needless deaths?
    Lucas takes my silence for shock, but
he’s wrong. What I feel now is anger.
    Anyone can betray anyone.

Lucas leads me underground, through no
less than three doors, each one a foot
thick and made of steel. They have no
locks, but he opens them with a flick of
his hand. It reminds me of the first time I
met him, when he waved apart the bars
of my cell.
    I hear the others before I see them,
their voices echoing off the metal walls
as they speak to one another. The king
rails, his words sending shivers through
me. His presence seems to fill the
bunker as he paces up and down, his
cloak flapping out behind him.
    “I want them found. I want them in
front of me with a blade at their backs,
and I want them to sing like the
cowardly birds they are!” He addresses
a Sentinel, but the masked woman
doesn’t even flinch. “I want to know
what’s going on!”
    Elara sits in a chair, one hand over
her heart, the other clutching tightly to
Maven.
    He starts at the sight of me. “Are you
all right?” he breathes, pulling me into a
quick embrace.
    “Just shaken,” I manage to say, trying
to communicate as much as I can. But
with Elara so close, I can barely allow
myself to think, let alone speak. “There
was an explosion after the shots. A
bomb.”
     Maven furrows his brow, confused,
but he quickly masks it with rage.
“Bastards.”
     “Savages,” King Tiberias hisses
through gritted teeth. “And what about
my son?”
     My gaze trails to Maven, before I
realize the king doesn’t mean Maven at
all. Maven takes it in stride. He’s used
to being overlooked.
     “Cal went after the shooters. He took
a band of Sentinels with him.” The
memory of him, dark and angry as a
flame, frightens me. “And then the
ballroom exploded. I don’t know how
many were still—still in there.”
     “Was there anything else, dear?”
Coming from Elara, the term of
endearment feels like an electric shock.
She looks paler than ever, her breath
coming in shallow pants. She’s afraid .
“Anything you remember?”
     “There was a banner, attached to a
spear. The Scarlet Guard did this.”
     “Did they?” she says, raising a
single eyebrow. I fight the urge to back
away, to run from her and her whispers.
At any moment I expect to feel her
slither into my head, to pull out the truth.
     But instead, Elara rips her eyes
away and turns on the king. “You see
what you’ve done?” Her lip curls over
her teeth. In the light, they look like
glittering fangs.
     “ Me ? You called the Guard small
and weak, you lied to our people,”
Tiberias snarls back at her. “Your
actions have weakened us against the
danger, not mine.”
     “And if you took care of this when
you had the chance, when they were
small and weak, this would have never
happened!”
     They rip at each other like starved
dogs, each one trying to take a bigger
bite.
     “Elara, they were not terrorists then.
I could not waste my soldiers and
officers on hunting down a few Reds
writing pamphlets. They did no harm.”
     Slowly, Elara points to the ceiling.
“Does that seem like no harm to you?”
He has no answer for her, and she
smirks, delighting in winning the
argument. “One day you men will learn
to pay attention and all the world will
tremble. They are a disease, one you
allowed to take hold. And it’s time to
kill this disease where it grows.”
     She stands from her chair, collecting
herself. “They are Red devils, and they
must have allies inside our own walls.”
I do my best to keep still, my eyes fixed
on the floor. “I think I’ll have a word
with the servants. Officer Samos, if you
would?”
     He jumps to attention, opening the
vault door for her. She sweeps out, two
Sentinels in tow, like a hurricane of
rage. Lucas goes with her, opening the
heavy doors in succession, each one
clanging farther and farther away. I don’t
want to know what the queen will do to
the servants, but I know it will hurt and I
know what she will find—nothing.
Walsh and Holland fled with Farley,
according to our plan. They knew it
would be too dangerous for them after
the ball—and they were right.
    The thick metal closes for a few
moments, only to swing open again.
Another      magnetron       directs    it:
Evangeline. She looks like hell in a
party dress, her jewelry mangled and
teeth on edge. Worst of all are her eyes,
wild and wet and streaming with black
makeup. Ptolemus. She weeps for her
dead brother. Even though I tell myself I
don’t care, I have to resist the urge to
reach out and comfort her. But it passes
as soon as her companion enters the
bunker behind her.
    There’s smoke and soot on his skin,
dirtying his once clean uniform.
Normally I’d be concerned at the ragged,
hateful look in Cal’s eyes, but something
else strikes fear into my bones. Blood
stains his black uniform and drips over
his hands. It is not silver. Red. The
blood is red.
    “Mare,” he says to me, but all his
warmth is gone. “Come with me. Now.”
    His words are directed at me, but
everyone follows, pushing through the
passages as he leads us to the cells. My
heart hammers in my chest, threatening to
explode out of me. Not Kilorn. Anyone
but him. Maven keeps a hand on my
shoulder, holding me close. At first I
think he’s comforting me, but then he
tugs me back: he’s trying to keep me
from running ahead.
    “You should’ve killed him where he
stood,” Evangeline says to Cal. Her
fingers pluck at the red blood on his
shirt. “I wouldn’t leave the Red devil
alive.”
    Him. My teeth bite my lips, holding
my mouth closed so I don’t say
something stupid. Maven’s hand tightens
like a claw on my shoulder and I can
feel his pulse quicken. For all we know,
this might be the end of our game. Elara
will come back and shatter their brains,
picking through the wreckage to
discover how deep their plot goes.
    The steps to the cells are the same
but seem longer, stretching down into the
deepest parts of the Hall. The dungeon
rises to greet us, and no less than six
Sentinels stand guard. An icy chill runs
through my bones, but I don’t shiver. I
can barely move.
    Four figures stand in the cell, each
one bloody and bruised. Despite the dim
light, I know them all. Walsh’s eye is
swollen shut, but she seems all right. Not
like Tristan, leaning against the wall to
take pressure off a leg wet with blood.
There’s a hasty bandage around the
wound, torn from Kilorn’s shirt by the
looks of it. For his part, Kilorn looks
unscathed, to my great relief. He
supports Farley with an arm, letting her
stand against him. Her shoulder is
dislocated, one arm hanging at a strange
angle. But that doesn’t stop her from
sneering at us. She even spits through the
bars, a mix of blood and saliva that
lands at Evangeline’s feet.
    “Take her tongue for that,”
Evangeline snarls, rushing at the bars.
She stops short, one hand slamming
against the metal. Though she could tear
it away with a thought, ripping apart the
cell and the people inside, she restrains
herself.
    Farley holds her gaze, barely
blinking at the outburst. If this is her end,
she’s certainly going to go with her head
high. “A little violent for a princess.”
    Before Evangeline can lose her
temper, Cal pulls her back from the bars.
Slowly, he raises a hand, pointing.
“You.”
    With a horrific lurch, I realize he’s
pointing at Kilorn. A muscle twitches in
Kilorn’s cheek, but he keeps his eyes on
the floor.
    Cal remembers him. From the night
he brought me home.
    “Mare, explain this.”
    I open my mouth, hoping some
fantastic lie will fall out, but nothing
comes.
     Cal’s gaze darkens. “He’s your
friend. Explain this.”
     Evangeline gasps and turns her wrath
on me. “You brought him here!” she
screeches, jumping at me. “You did
this?!”
     “I did n-nothing,” I stammer, feeling
all the eyes in the room on me. “I mean, I
did get him a job here. He was at the
lumberyards and it’s hard work, deadly
work—” The lies tumble from me, each
one quicker than the last. “He’s—he was
my friend, back in the village. I just
wanted to make sure he was okay. I got
him the job as a servant, just like—” My
eyes trail to Cal. Both of us remember
the night we first met, and the day that
followed. “I thought I was helping him.”
    Maven takes a step toward the cell,
looking at our friends like it’s the first
time he’s ever seen them. He gestures to
their red uniforms. “They seem to be
only servants.”
    “I’d say the same, except we found
them trying to escape through a
drainpipe,” Cal snaps. “Took us a while
to drag them out.”
    “Is this all of them?” King Tiberias
says, peering through the cell bars.
    Cal shakes his head. “There were
more ahead, but they got to the river.
How many, I don’t know.”
    “Well, let’s find out,” Evangeline
says, her eyebrows raised. “Call for the
queen. And in the meantime . . .” She
faces the king. Beneath his beard, he
grins a little and nods.
    I don’t have to ask to know what
they’re thinking about. Torture.
    The four prisoners stand strong, not
even flinching. Maven’s jaw works
furiously as he tries to think of a way out
of this, but he knows there isn’t one. If
anything, this might be more than we
could hope for. If they manage to lie. But
how can we ask them to? How can we
watch them scream while we stand tall?
    Kilorn seems to have an answer for
me. Even in this awful place, his green
eyes manage to shine. I will lie for you.
    “Cal, I leave the honor to you,” the
king says, resting a hand on his son’s
shoulder. I can only stare, pleading with
wide eyes, praying Cal will not do as
his father asks.
    He glances at me once, like
somehow that counts as an apology.
Then he turns to a Sentinel, shorter than
the others. Her eyes sparkle gray-white
behind her mask.
    “Sentinel Gliacon, I find myself in
need of some ice.”
    What that means, I have no idea, but
Evangeline giggles. “Good choice.”
    “You don’t need to see this,” Maven
mutters, trying to pull me away. But I
can’t leave Kilorn. Not now. I angrily
shrug him off, my eyes still on my friend.
    “Let her stay,” Evangeline crows,
taking pleasure in my discomfort. “This
will teach her to treat Reds as friends.”
She turns back to the cell, waving open
the bars. With one white finger, she
points. “Start with her. She needs to be
broken.”
    The Sentinel nods and seizes Farley
by the wrist, pulling her out of the cell.
The bars slide back into place behind
her, trapping the rest in. Walsh and
Kilorn rush to the bars, both of them the
picture of fear.
    The Sentinel forces Farley to her
knees, waiting for her next order. “Sir?”
    Cal moves to stand over her,
breathing heavily. He hesitates before
speaking, but his voice is strong. “How
many more of you are there?”
    Farley’s jaw locks in place, her teeth
together. She’ll die before she talks.
    “Start with the arm.”
    The Sentinel is not gentle, wrenching
out Farley’s wounded arm. Farley yelps
in pain but still says nothing. It takes
everything I have not to strike the
Sentinel.
    “And you call us the savages,”
Kilorn spits, forehead against the bars.
    Slowly, the Sentinel peels away
Farley’s blood-soaked sleeve and sets
pale, cruel hands to her skin. Farley
screams at the touch, but why, I can’t
say.
    “Where are the others?” Cal
questions, kneeling to look her in the
eyes. For a moment she falls quiet,
drawing a ragged breath. He leans in,
patiently waiting for her to break.
    Instead, Farley snaps forward, head
butting him with all her strength. “We
are everywhere.” She laughs, but
screams again as the Sentinel resumes
her torture.
    Cal recovers neatly, one hand to his
now broken nose. Another person might
strike back, but he doesn’t.
    Red pinpricks appear on Farley’s
arm, around the Sentinel’s hand. They
grow with each passing second, sharp
and shiny red points sticking straight out
of now bluish skin. Sentinel Gliacon.
House Gliacon. My mind flies back to
Protocol, to the house lessons. Shivers.
    With a lurch, I understand and I have
to look away.
    “That’s blood,” I whisper, unable to
look back. “She’s freezing her blood.”
Maven only nods, his eyes grave and full
of sorrow.
    Behind us, the Sentinel continues to
work, moving up Farley’s arm. Red
icicles sharp as razors pierce through
her flesh, slicing every nerve in a pain I
can’t imagine. Farley’s breath whistles
through gritted teeth. Still she says
nothing. My heart races as the seconds
tick by, wondering when the queen will
return, wondering when our play will be
truly over.
    Finally, Cal jumps to his feet.
“Enough.”
    Another Sentinel, a Skonos skin
healer, drops down next to Farley. She
all but collapses, staring blankly at her
arm, now jagged with knives of frozen
blood. The new Sentinel heals her
quickly, hands moving in a practiced
fashion.
    Farley chuckles darkly as the warmth
returns to her arm. “All to do it again,
eh?”
    Cal folds his arms behind his back.
He shares a glance with his father, who
nods. “Indeed,” Cal sighs, looking back
to the shiver. But she doesn’t get a
chance to continue.
    “WHERE IS SHE?” a terrible voice
screams, echoing down the stairs to us
below.
    Evangeline whirls at the noise,
rushing to the bottom of the stairs. “I’m
here!” she shouts back.
    When Ptolemus Samos steps down to
embrace his sister, I have to dig my nails
into my palm to keep from reacting.
There he stands, alive and breathing and
terribly angry. On the floor, Farley
curses to herself.
    He only lingers for a moment and
sidesteps Evangeline, a terrifying fury in
his eyes. His armored suit is mangled at
the shoulder, pulverized by a bullet. But
the skin beneath is unbroken. Healed. He
prowls toward the cell, hands flexing.
The metal bars quiver in their sockets,
screeching against concrete.
    “Ptolemus, not yet—,” Cal growls,
grabbing for him, but Ptolemus shoves
the prince off. Despite Cal’s size and
strength, he stumbles backward.
    Evangeline runs at her brother,
pulling his hand. “No, we need them to
talk!” With one shrug of his arm he
breaks her grip—not even she can stop
him.
    The bars crack, shrieking with his
power as the cell opens to him. Not even
the Sentinels can stop him as he strides
forward, moving quickly with practiced
motions. Kilorn and Walsh scramble,
jumping back against the stone walls, but
Ptolemus is a predator, and predators
attack the weak. With his broken leg,
barely able to move, Tristan doesn’t
stand a chance.
    “You will not threaten my sister
again,” Ptolemus roars, directing the
metal bars of the cell. One spears right
through Tristan’s chest. He gasps,
choking on his own blood, dying. And
Ptolemus actually smiles.
    When he turns on Kilorn, murder in
his heart, I snap.
    Sparks blaze to life in my skin. When
my hand closes around Ptolemus’s
muscled neck, I let the sparks go. They
shock into him, lightning dancing through
his veins, and he seizes under my touch.
The metal of his uniform vibrates and
smokes, almost cooking him alive. And
then he drops to the concrete floor, his
body still shaking with sparks.
    “Ptolemus!” Evangeline scrambles
to his side, reaching for his face. A
shock jumps to her fingers, forcing her to
fall back with a scowl. She rounds on
me in a blaze of anger. “How dare you
—!”
    “He’ll be fine.” I didn’t hit him with
enough to do any real damage. “Like you
said, we need them to talk. They can’t do
that if they’re dead.”
    The others stare at me with a strange
mix of emotions, their eyes wide—and
afraid. Cal, the boy I kissed, the soldier,
the brute, can’t hold my gaze at all. I
recognize the expression on his face:
shame. But because he hurt Farley, or
because he couldn’t make her talk, I
don’t know. At least Maven has the good
sense to look sad, his stare resting on
Tristan’s still bleeding body.
    “Mother can attend to the prisoners
later,” he says, addressing the king. “But
the people upstairs will want to see their
king and know he is safe. So many have
died. You should comfort them, Father.
And you as well, Cal.”
    He’s playing for time . Brilliant
Maven is trying to buy us a chance.
    Even though it makes my skin crawl,
I reach out to touch Cal’s shoulder. He
kissed me once. He might still listen
when I speak. “He’s right, Cal. This can
wait.”
    Still on the floor, Evangeline bares
her teeth. “The court will want answers,
not embraces! This must be done now!
Your Majesty, rip the truth from them—”
    But even Tiberias sees the wisdom
of Maven’s words. “They will keep,” he
echoes. “And tomorrow the truth will be
known.”
    My grip tightens on Cal’s arm,
feeling the tense muscles beneath. He
relaxes into my touch, looking like a
great weight has fallen off him.
    The Sentinels jump to attention and
pull Farley back into the broken cell.
Her eyes stay on me, wondering what the
hell I have in mind. I wish I knew.
     Evangeline half drags Ptolemus out,
letting the bars knit together behind her.
“You are weak, my prince,” she hisses
into Cal’s ear.
     I resist the urge to look back at
Kilorn, as his words echo in my head.
Stop trying to protect me.
     I will not.

Blood drips from my sleeve, leaving a
spotted silver trail in my wake as we
march to the throne room. Sentinels and
Security guard the immense door, their
guns raised and aimed at the
passageway. They don’t move as we
pass, frozen in place. Their orders are to
kill, should the need arise. Beyond, the
grand chamber echoes with anger and
sorrow. I want to feel some shred of
victory, but the memory of Kilorn behind
bars dampens any happiness I might
have. Even the colonel’s glassy eyes
haunt me.
    I move to Cal’s side. He barely
notices, his eyes burning at the floor.
“How many dead?”
    “Ten so far,” he mutters. “Three in
the shooting, eight in the explosion.
Fifteen more wounded.” It sounds like
he’s listing groceries, not people. “But
they’ll all heal.”
    He jerks his thumb, gesturing to the
healers running among the injured. I
count two children among them. And
beyond the wounded are the bodies of
the dead, laid out before the king’s
throne. Belicos Lerolan’s twin sons lie
next to him, with their weeping mother
holding vigil over the bodies.
    I have to put a hand to my mouth to
keep from gasping. I never wanted this.
    Maven’s warm hands take mine,
pulling me past the gruesome scene to
our place by the throne. Cal stands close
by, trying in vain to wipe the red blood
off his hands.
    “The time for tears is over,”
Tiberias thunders, fists clenching at his
sides. In complete unison, the sobs and
sniffles through the chamber die out.
“Now we honor the dead, heal the
wounded, and avenge our fallen. I am
the king. I do not forget. I do not forgive.
I have been lenient in the past, allowing
our Red brothers a good life full of
prosperity, of dignity. But they spit upon
us, they reject our mercy, and they have
brought upon themselves the worst kind
of doom.”
    With a snarl, he throws down the
silver spear and red rag. It clatters
across the floor with a sound like a
funeral bell. The torn sun stares at us all.
    “These fools, these terrorists, these
murderers, will be brought to justice.
And they will die. I swear on my crown,
on my throne, on my sons, they will die.”
    A rumbling murmur goes through the
crowd as each Silver stirs. They stand
as one, wounded or not. The metallic
smell of blood is almost overpowering.
   “Strength,” the court screams.
“Power! Death!”
   Maven glances at me, his eyes wide
and afraid. I know what he’s thinking,
because I think it too.
   What have we done?
          TWENTY-ONE

Back in my room, I rip the ruined dress
off, letting the silk fall to the floor. The
king’s words replay in my head,
peppered with flashes of this terrible
night. Kilorn’s eyes stand out through it
all, a green fire burning me up. I must
protect him, but how? If only I could
trade myself for him again, my freedom
for his. If only things were that simple
anymore. Julian’s lessons have never
felt so sharp in my mind: the past is so
much greater than this future.
     Julian. Julian.
     The residence halls crawl with
Sentinels and Security, every one of
them on edge. But I’ve long perfected the
art of slipping by unnoticed, and Julian’s
door is not far away. Despite the hour,
he’s awake, poring over books.
Everything looks the same, like nothing’s
happened. Maybe he doesn’t know. But
then I notice the bottle of brown liquor
on the table, occupying a spot usually
reserved for tea. Of course he knows.
    “In light of recent events, I would
think our lessons have been canceled for
the time being,” he says over the pages
of his book. Still, he shuts it with a snap,
turning his full attention on me. “Not to
mention it’s quite late.”
    “I need you, Julian.”
    “Does this have anything to do with
the Sun Shooting? Yes, they’ve already
thought up a clever name.” He points to
the dark video screen in the corner. “It’s
been on the news for hours now. The
king’s addressing the country in the
morning.”
    I remember the fluffy blond
newswoman reporting the capital
bombing more than a month ago. There
were few injuries then, and still the
marketplace rioted. What will they do
now? How many innocent Reds will
pay?
    “Or is this about the four terrorists
currently locked in the cells of this
structure?” Julian presses on, measuring
my response. “Excuse me, I mean three.
Ptolemus Samos certainly lives up to his
reputation.”
    “They’re not terrorists,” I reply
calmly, trying to keep myself in check.
    “Shall I show you the definition of
terrorism, Mare?” His tone stings.
“Their cause might be just, but their
methods . . . besides, what you say
doesn’t matter.” He gestures to the video
screen again. “They have their own
version of the truth, and that’s the only
one people will hear.”
    My teeth grind together painfully,
bone on bone. “Are you going to help or
not?”
    “I am a teacher and somewhat of an
outcast, in case you haven’t noticed.
What can I possibly do?”
    “Julian, please.” I can feel my last
chance slipping through my fingers.
“You’re a singer, you can tell the guards
—make them do anything you want. You
can set the prisoners free.”
    But he remains still, sipping
peacefully at his drink. He doesn’t
grimace like men normally do. The bite
of alcohol is familiar to him.
    “Tomorrow they’ll be interrogated.
And no matter how strong they are, no
matter how long they hold out, the truth
will be found.” Slowly, I take Julian’s
hand, holding fingers worn rough by
paper. “This was my plan. I’m one of
them.” He doesn’t need to know about
Maven. It will only make him angrier.
    The half lie does its job well. I can
see it in Julian’s eyes.
    “You? You did this?” he stammers.
“The shooting, the bombing—?”
    “The bomb was . . . unexpected.”
The bomb was a horror.
    He narrows his eyes, and I can see
the cogs turning in his mind. Then he
snaps entirely. “I told you, I told you not
to get in over your head!” He slams a fist
down on the table, looking angrier than
I’ve ever seen him before. “And now,”
he breathes, staring at me with so much
sorrow it makes my heart hurt, “now I
must watch you drown?”
    “If they escape . . .”
    He throws back the rest of his drink
with a gulp. With a snap of his wrist, he
smashes the glass on the floor, making
me jump. “And what about me? Even if I
take away the cameras, the guards’
memories, anything that could implicate
either of us, the queen will know.”
Shaking his head, he sighs. “She’ll take
my eyes for this.”
    And Julian will never read again.
How can I ask for that?
    “Then let me die.” The words stick
in my throat. “I deserve it as much as
they do.”
    He can’t let me die. He won’t. I am
the little lightning girl, and I am going
to make the world change.
    When he speaks again, he sounds
hollow.
    “They called my sister’s death a
suicide.” Slowly, he traces his fingers
across his wrist, dwelling on a long-ago
memory. “That was a lie, and I knew it.
She was a sad woman, but she never
would have done such a thing. Not when
she had Cal, and Tibe. She was
murdered, and I said nothing. I was
afraid, and I let her die in shame. And
since that day, I’ve been working to fix
that, waiting in the shadows of this
monstrous world, waiting for my time to
avenge her.” He raises his eyes to me.
They sparkle with tears. “I suppose this
will be a good place to start.”

It doesn’t take long for Julian to figure
out a plan. All we need is a magnetron
and some blind cameras, and luckily, I
can provide both.
    Lucas knocks on my bedroom door
not two minutes after I summon him.
    “What can I do for you, Mare?” he
says, jumpier than usual. I know his time
overseeing the queen’s interrogation of
servants must not have been easy. At
least he’ll be too distracted to notice I’m
shaking.
    “I’m hungry.” The rehearsed words
come easier than they should. “You
know, dinner never happened, so I was
wondering—”
    “Do I look like a cook? You
should’ve called the kitchens, that’s their
job.”
    “I just, well, I don’t think now’s a
good time for the servants to be roaming
around. People are still pretty on edge,
and I don’t want anyone getting hurt
because I didn’t get dinner. You’d just
have to escort me, that’s all. And who
knows, you might get a cookie out of it.”
    Sighing like an annoyed teenager,
Lucas holds out an arm. As I take it, I
glance at the cameras in the hall, making
them die off. Here we go.
    I should feel wrong about using
Lucas, knowing firsthand what it’s like
to have your mind toyed with, but this is
for Kilorn’s life. Lucas is still chattering
when we turn the corner, running smack
into Julian.
    “Lord Jacos—,” Lucas begins,
moving to bow his head, but Julian takes
him by the chin, moving quicker than I
ever thought he could. Before Lucas can
respond, Julian glares into his eyes and
the struggle dies before it even begins.
    His honeyed words, smooth as butter
and strong as iron, fall on open ears.
“Take us to the cells. Use the service
halls. Keep us away from patrols. Do
not remember this.”
    Lucas, usually all smiles and jokes,
falls into a strange, half-hypnotized state.
His eyes glaze over and he doesn’t
notice when Julian reaches down to take
his gun. But he marches all the same,
leading us through the maze of the Hall.
At each turn I wait for the feel of electric
eyes, shutting off everything in our path.
Julian does the same to the guards,
forcing them not to remember us as we
pass. Together, we make an unbeatable
team, and it’s not long before we stand
at the top of the dungeon stairs. There
will be Sentinels down there, too many
for Julian to take care of on his own.
    “Speak not a word,” Julian hisses to
Lucas, who nods in understanding.
    Now it’s my turn to lead us. I expect
to be afraid, but the dim light and the late
hour feel familiar. This is where I
belong, sneaking and lying and stealing.
    “Who is it? State your name and
business!” one of the Sentinels shouts up
at us. I recognize her voice—Gliacon,
the shiver who tortured Farley. Perhaps
I can convince Julian to sing her off a
cliff.
     I draw myself up to my full height,
though it’s my voice and tone that matter
most. “My name is Lady Mareena
Titanos, betrothed of the prince Maven,”
I snap, moving down the steps with as
much grace as I can. My voice is cold
and sharp, mirroring Elara’s and
Evangeline’s. I have strength and
power too. “And I don’t share my
business with Sentinels.”
     At the sight of me, the four Sentinels
exchange glances, questioning one
another. One, a large man with pig eyes,
even looks me up and down in a rude
manner. Behind the bars, Kilorn and
Walsh jump to attention. Farley doesn’t
move from her corner, arms curled
around her knees. For a second I think
she might be sleeping, until she moves
and her blue eyes reflect the light.
    “I need to know, my lady,” Gliacon
says, sounding apologetic. She nods to
Julian and Lucas, who follow me down.
“Goes for you two as well.”
    “I would like a private audience
with these”—I throw as much disgust
into my voice as I can; it’s not hard, with
the pig-eyed Sentinel standing so close
—“creatures. We have questions that
must be answered and wrongs to repay.
Don’t we, Julian?”
    Julian sneers, putting on a good
show. “It’ll be easy to make them sing.”
    “Not possible, m’lady,” Pig-Eyes
snorts. His accent is hard and rough,
from Harbor Bay. “Our orders are to
stay right here, all night. We move for no
one.”
    Once, a boy in the Stilts called me a
rotten flirt for charming him out of a
good pair of boots. “You understand my
position, don’t you? I will be a princess
soon, and the favor of a princess is a
very valuable thing. Besides, the Red
rats must be taught a lesson. A painful
one.”
    Pig-Eyes blinks sluggishly at me,
thinking it over. Julian hovers at my
shoulder, ready with his sweet words if
I need them. Two heartbeats pass before
Pig-Eyes nods, waving to the others.
“We can give you five minutes.”
    My face hurts from smiling so
widely, but I don’t care. “Thank you so
much. I am in your debt, all of you.”
    They tromp away in a single file,
their boots scuffing. As soon as they
reach the top landing, I allow myself to
hope. Five minutes will be more than
enough.
    Kilorn almost jumps at the bars,
eager to be free of his cell, and Walsh
pulls Farley to her feet. But I don’t move
at all. I don’t intend to free them, not yet.
    “Mare—,” Kilorn whispers, puzzled
at my hesitation, but I silence him with a
look.
    “The bomb.” Smoke and fire cloud
my thoughts, bringing me back to the
moment the ballroom exploded. “Tell
me about the bomb.”
    I expect them to fall over themselves
in apologies, to beg my forgiveness, but
instead, the three exchange blank looks.
Farley leans against the bars, her eyes on
fire.
    “I don’t know anything about that,”
she hisses, barely audible. “I never
authorized such a thing. It was supposed
to be organized, with special targets. We
do not kill at random, without purpose.”
    “The capital, the other bombings
—?”
    “You know those buildings were
empty. No one died there, not because of
us,” she says evenly. “I swear to you,
Mare, this was not our doing.”
    “Do you really think we’d try to
blow up our greatest hope?” Kilorn
adds. I don’t need to ask to know he
means me.
    Finally, I nod over my shoulder to
Julian.
    “Open the cell. Quietly,” Julian
murmurs, his hands on Lucas’s face.
    The magnetron complies, forcing the
bars into an open O wide enough to step
through. Walsh comes out first, her eyes
wide in amazement. Kilorn is next,
helping Farley fit through the bars. Her
arm still dangles helplessly—the healer
missed a spot.
    I gesture to the wall, and they move
soundlessly, mice on stone. Walsh’s
eyes touch on Tristan’s body, still
lifeless in the cell, but she stays put
beside Farley. Julian shoves Lucas in
next to them before taking his spot next
to the foot of the stairs, across from the
freed prisoners.
     I take the other side, pressing myself
in next to Kilorn. Even though he’s spent
the night in the cells, with a dead body
for company, he still smells like home.
     “I knew you’d come,” he whispers in
my ear. “I knew it.”
     But there’s no time for pleasantries
or celebrations. Not until they’re away
safely.
     Across the open gap of stairwell,
Julian nods at me. He’s ready.
     “Sentinel Gliacon, may I have a
word?” I shout up the stairs, laying the
bait for our next trap. The shuffle of feet
tells me she’s taken it.
     “What is it, my lady?”
     When she reaches the floor, her eyes
fly straight to the open cell and she gasps
behind her mask. But Julian is too quick,
even for a Sentinel.
     “You went for a walk. You returned
to find this. You do not remember us.
Call down one of the others,” he
murmurs, his voice a terrible song.
     “Sentinel Tyros, you are needed,”
she says flatly.
     “Now you will sleep.”
     She drops almost before the last
word leaves his lips, but Julian catches
her around the middle and lays her
gently down behind him. Kilorn exhales
in surprise, impressed by Julian, who
allows himself a small, pleased smile.
    Tyros comes down the stairs next,
confused, but eager to serve. Julian does
it again, singing his orders in a few
whispered seconds. I didn’t expect
Sentinels to be so stupid, but it makes
sense. They’re trained from childhood in
the art of combat; logic and intelligence
are not their highest priorities.
    But the last two, Pig-Eyes and the
healer, are not complete fools. When
Tyros calls out, ordering the skin healer
Sentinel to come down, they mutter to
each other.
    “About finished, Lady Titanos?”
Pig-Eyes calls, his voice wary.
    Thinking quickly, I shout back to
them. “Yes, we’re finished. Your
companions have returned to their posts,
I want to make sure you do as well.”
    “Oh, have they? Is that right, Tyros?”
    With blinding speed, Julian kneels
over the fainted Tyros. He pries his eyes
open, holding the lids. “Say you’ve
returned to your post. Say the lady has
finished.”
    “Returned to my post,” Tyros
drones. Hopefully the long stairwell and
stone walls will distort his voice. “The
lady has finished.”
    Pig-Eyes grunts to himself. “Very
well.”
    Their boots stamp against the steps,
both coming down together. Two. Julian
cannot handle two alone. I feel Kilorn
tense at my back, his fist clenching as he
prepares for anything. With one hand I
push him back against the wall, while
the other grows white with sparks.
    The footsteps stop, just beyond the
opening. I can’t see them and neither can
Julian, but Pig-Eyes breathes like a dog.
The healer is there as well, waiting just
beyond our reach. In total silence, it’s
hard not to hear the click of a gun.
    Julian’s eyes widen, but he stands
firm, one hand closing around his stolen
weapon. I don’t even want to breathe,
knowing the edge we’re all standing on.
The walls seem to shrink, boxing us into
a stone coffin with no escape.
    I feel very calm when I slide out in
front of the steps, my sparking hand
behind my back. I expect to feel bullets
at any minute, but the pain never comes.
They won’t shoot me, not until I give
them a good reason.
    “Is there some problem, Sentinels?”
I sneer, quirking an eyebrow like I’ve
seen Evangeline do a hundred times.
Slowly, I take a step up, bringing the
pair of them into view. They stand side
by side, fingers itching on twin triggers.
“I’d prefer it if you wouldn’t point your
guns at me.”
    Pig-Eyes glares at me outright, but it
does nothing to faze me. You are a lady.
Act like it. Act for your life. “Where’s
your friend?”
     “Oh, he’s coming along. One of the
prisoners has a mouth on her. She
needed some extra attention.” The lie
comes so easily. Practice really does
make perfect.
     Grinning, Pig-Eyes lowers his gun a
bit. “The scarred bitch? Had to show her
the back of my hand myself.” He
chuckles. I laugh with him and dream
about what lightning could do to his
fleshy, pale eyes.
     As I move closer, the skin healer
puts one hand on the metal rail, blocking
my way. I do the same. It feels cold in
my hand, and solid. Easy does it, I tell
myself, pushing just enough energy into
my sparks. Not enough to burn, not
enough to scar, but enough to take care
of them both. It’s like threading a needle,
and for once, I’m the sewing expert.
    Above me, the healer doesn’t laugh
with his friend. His eyes are bright
silver, and, with the mask and fiery
cloak, he looks like a demon from a
nightmare.
    “What’s behind your back?” he
hisses through the mask.
    I shrug, allowing myself one more
step. “Nothing, Sentinel Skonos.”
    The next words are ragged. “You
lie.”
    We react in the same second,
blasting into action. The bullet hits me in
the stomach, but my lightning blazes up
the metal rail, through his skin and into
the healer’s brain. Pig-Eyes shouts,
firing his own gun. The bullet digs into
the wall, missing me by inches. But I
don’t miss him, lashing with the ball of
sparks behind my back. They slide past
me, both unconscious, their muscles
twitching with shocks.
     And then I’m falling.
     I briefly wonder if the stone floor
will smash my skull. I suppose that’s
easier than bleeding to death. Instead,
long arms catch me.
     “Mare, you’ll be fine,” Kilorn
whispers. His hand covers my stomach,
trying to stop the bleeding. His eyes are
green as grass. They stand out in a world
fading to darkness. “It’s nothing at all.”
    “Put those on,” Julian snaps to the
others. Farley and Walsh rush past me to
pull on the fire-red cloaks and masks.
“You too!”
    He yanks Kilorn off me, almost
throwing him across the room in his
haste.
    “Julian—,” I choke out, trying to
grab him. I must thank him.
    But he’s beyond my reach, kneeling
over the healer. He rips open the
Sentinel’s eyelids and sings, ordering
him to wake up. The next thing I know,
the healer stares down at me, his hands
on my wound. It only takes a second
before the world shifts back to normal.
In the corner, Kilorn breathes a sigh of
relief and pulls a cloak over his head.
    “Her as well.” I point to Farley.
Julian nods and directs the healer over
to her. With an audible pop, her shoulder
snaps back into place.
    “Much obliged,” she says, pulling
the mask over her face.
    Walsh stands over us all, her mask
forgotten in her hand. She stares at the
fallen Sentinels, jaw agape. “Are they
dead?” she asks, whispering like a
frightened child.
    Julian looks up from Pig-Eyes,
finished singing to him. “Hardly. This lot
will be awake in a few hours, and if
you’re lucky, no one will know you’re
gone until then.”
    “I can work with a few hours.”
Farley smacks at Walsh, snapping her
back to reality. “Get your head on
straight, girl, we’ve got a lot of running
to do tonight.”
    It doesn’t take long to slip them
through the last few passages. Even so,
my fear grows with each passing
heartbeat, until we find ourselves in the
middle of Cal’s garage. The slack-jawed
Lucas tears a hole in the metal door like
he’s ripping paper, revealing the night
beyond.
    Walsh hugs me, taking me by
surprise. “I don’t know how,” she
mutters, “but I hope you become queen
one day. Imagine what you could do
then? The Red queen.”
    I have to smile at the impossible
thought. “Go, before your nonsense rubs
off on me.”
    Farley isn’t one for hugs, but she
does pat me on the shoulder. “We’ll
meet again, and soon.”
    “Not like this, I hope.”
    Her face splits into a rare, toothy
smile. Despite the scar, I realize she’s
very pretty.
    “Not like this,” she echoes, before
slipping out into the night with Walsh.
    “I know I can’t ask you to come with
me,” Kilorn mutters, moving to follow
them. He stares at his hands, examining
scars I know better than my own mind.
Look at me, you idiot.
    Sighing, I force myself to shove him
toward freedom. “The cause needs me
here. You need me here too.”
    “What I need and what I want are
two very different things.”
    I try to laugh, but I can’t find the
strength.
    “This is not our end, Mare,” Kilorn
murmurs, embracing me. He laughs to
himself, the noise vibrating in his chest.
“Red queen. Has a nice ring to it.”
    “Get on, you fool.” Never have I
smiled so brightly and still felt so sad.
    He spares me one last glance and
nods to Julian, before stepping out into
the darkness. The metal knits back
together behind him, blocking my friends
from sight. Where they’re going, I don’t
want to know.
    Julian has to pull me away, but he
doesn’t scold me for my long good-bye.
I think he’s more preoccupied with
Lucas, who, in his dazed state, has begun
to drool.
         TWENTY-TWO

That night I dream of my brother Shade
coming to visit me in the darkness. He
smells like gunpowder. But when I
blink, he disappears and my mind
screams what I already know. Shade is
dead.
     When morning comes, a series of
shuffles and slams makes me bolt awake,
sitting up in my bed. I expect to see
Sentinels, Cal, or a murderous Ptolemus
ready to rip me apart for what I’ve done,
but it’s just the maids bustling in my
closet. They look more harried than
usual and pull down my clothes with
abandon.
    “What’s going on?”
    In the closet, the girls freeze. They
bow, hands full of silk and linen. As I
come closer, I realize they’re standing
over a set of leather trunks. “Are we
going somewhere?”
    “Orders, my lady,” one says, her
eyes lowered. “We only know what
we’re told.”
    “Of course. Well, I’m just going to
get dressed then.” I reach for the nearest
outfit, intending to do something for
myself for once, but the maids beat me to
it.
    Five minutes later, they have me
painted and ready, dressed in odd
leather pants and a flouncy shirt. I’d
much prefer my training suit over
everything else, but it’s apparently not
“proper” to wear the thing outside of
sessions.
    “Lucas?” I ask the empty hallway,
half expecting him to pop out from an
alcove.
    But Lucas is nowhere to be found,
and I head off to Protocol, expecting him
to cross my path. When he doesn’t, a trill
of fear ripples through me. Julian made
him forget last night, but maybe
something slipped through the cracks.
Maybe he’s being questioned, punished,
for the night he can’t remember and what
we forced him to do.
    But I’m not alone for long. Maven
steps into my path, his lips quirked into
an amused smile.
    “You’re up early.” Then he leans in,
speaking in a low whisper. “Especially
for having such a late night.”
    “I don’t know what you mean.” I try
for an innocent tone.
    “The prisoners are gone. All three of
them, disappeared into thin air.”
    I put a hand to my heart, letting
myself look shocked for the cameras.
“By my colors! A few Reds, escaped
from us? That seems impossible.”
    “It does indeed.” Though the smile
remains, his eyes darken slightly. “Of
course, that brings everything into
question. The power outages, the failing
security system, not to mention a troop of
Sentinels with blank spots across their
memories.” He stares pointedly at me.
    I return his sharp glance, letting him
see my unease. “Your mother . . .
interrogated them.”
    “She did.”
    “And will she be talking to”—I
choose my words very carefully
—“anyone else regarding the escape?
Officers, guards—?”
    Maven shakes his head. “Whoever
did this did it well. I helped her with the
questioning and directed her to anyone
of suspicion.” Directed. Directed away
from me. I breathe a small sigh of relief
and squeeze his arm, thanking him for his
protection. “Besides, we may never find
who did it. People have been fleeing
since last night. They think the Hall is no
longer safe.”
    “After last night, they’re probably
right.” I slip my arm into his, drawing
him closer. “What did your mother learn
of the bomb?”
    His voice drops to a whisper.
“There was no bomb.” What? “It was an
explosion, but it was also an accident. A
bullet punctured a gas line in the floor,
and when Cal’s fire hit it . . .” He trails
off, letting his hands do the talking. “It
was Mother’s idea to use that to our, ah,
advantage.”
    We don’t kill without purpose .
“She’s turning the Guard into monsters.”
    He nods gravely. “No one will want
to stand with them. Not even Reds.”
    My blood seems to boil. More lies.
She’s beating us without firing a shot or
drawing a blade. Words are all she
needs. And now I’m being sent deeper
into her world, to Archeon.
    You won’t see your family again.
Gisa will grow, until you don’t
recognize her anymore. Bree and
Tramy will marry, have children, and
forget you. Dad will die slowly,
suffocated by his wounds, and when
he’s gone, Mom will slip away too.
    Maven lets me think, his eyes
thoughtful as he watches the emotions
rise in my face. He always lets me think.
Sometimes his silence is better than
anyone else’s words.
     “How long do we have left here?”
     “We go this afternoon. Most of the
court is leaving before that, but we have
to take the boat. Keep some tradition in
all this madness.”
     When I was a little girl, I used to sit
on my porch and watch the pretty boats
pass, heading downriver to the capital.
Shade would laugh at me for wanting to
catch a glimpse of the king. I didn’t
realize then it was just part of the
pageant, another display just like the
arena fights, to show exactly how low
we were in the grand scheme of the
world. Now I’m going to be part of it
again, this time standing on the other
side.
    “At least you’ll get to see your home
again, if only for a little while,” he adds,
trying to be gentle. Yes, Maven, that’s
just what I want. To stand and watch
my home and my old life pass by.
    But that’s the price I must pay.
Freeing Kilorn and the others means
losing my last few days in the valley,
and it’s a trade I’m happy to make.
    We’re interrupted by a loud crash
from a nearby passage, the one leading
to Cal’s room. Maven reacts first,
moving to the edge of the hall before I
can, like he’s trying to protect me from
something.
    “Bad dreams, brother?” he calls out,
worried by what he sees.
    In response, Cal steps out into the
hallway, his fists clenched, like he’s
trying to keep his own hands in check.
Gone is the bloodstained uniform,
replaced by what looks like Ptolemus’s
armor, though Cal’s has a reddish tint.
    I want to slap him, to claw at him
and scream for what he did to Farley and
Tristan and Kilorn and Walsh. The
sparks dance inside me, begging to be
loosed. But after all, what did I expect? I
know what he is and what he believes in
—Reds are not worth saving. So I speak
as civilly as I can.
    “Will you be leaving with your
legion?” I know he isn’t, judging by the
livid anger in his eyes. Once, I feared he
would go, and now I wish he would. I
can’t believe I cared about saving him.
I can’t believe that was ever a thought
in my head.
    Cal heaves a breath. “The Shadow
Legion isn’t going anywhere. Father will
not allow it. Not now. It’s too
dangerous, and I’m too valuable.”
    “You know he’s right.” Maven puts a
hand on his brother’s shoulder, trying to
calm him. I remember watching Cal do
the same thing to Maven, but now the
crown is on a different head. “You are
the heir. He can’t afford to lose you
too.”
    “I’m a soldier,” Cal spits, shrugging
away from his brother’s touch. “I can’t
just sit by and let others fight for me. I
won’t do it.”
    He sounds like a child whining for a
toy—he must enjoy killing. It makes me
sick. I don’t speak, letting the diplomatic
Maven talk for me. He always knows
what to say.
    “Find another cause. Build another
cycle, double your training, drill your
me n , prepare yourself for when the
danger passes. Cal, you can do a
thousand other things, and none of them
end with you being killed in some kind
of ambush!” he says, glaring up at his
brother. Then he smirks, trying to lighten
the mood. “You never change, Cal. You
just can’t sit still.”
    After a moment of harsh silence, Cal
breaks into a weak smile. “Never.” His
eyes flick to me, but I won’t get caught in
his bronze stare, not again.
    I turn my head, pretending to
examine a painting on the wall. “Nice
armor,” I sneer. “It will go well with
your collection.”
    He looks stung, even confused, but
quickly recovers. His smile is gone now,
replaced by narrowed eyes and a
clenched jaw. He taps at his armor; it
sounds like claws on stone. “This was a
gift from Ptolemus. I seem to share a
common cause with my betrothed’s
brother.” My betrothed. Like that’s
supposed to make me jealous or
something.
    Maven eyes the armor warily. “What
do you mean?”
    “Ptolemus commands the officers in
the capital. Together with me and my
legion, we might be able to do something
of use, even within the city.”
    Cold fear steals into my heart again,
brushing away whatever hope and
happiness last night’s success brought
me. “And what is that, exactly?” I hear
myself breathe.
    “I’m a good hunter. He’s a good
killer.” Cal takes a step backward,
walking away from us.
    I can feel him slipping down not just
the hall but a dark and twisted path. It
makes me afraid for the boy who taught
me how to dance. No, not for him. Of
him. And that is worse than all my other
terrors and nightmares.
    “Between the two of us, we’ll root
out the Scarlet Guard. We’ll end this
rebellion once and for all.”

There’s no schedule for today, as
everyone is too busy leaving to teach or
train. Fleeing might be a better word,
because that’s certainly what this looks
like from my vantage point in the
entrance hall. I used to think the Silvers
were untouchable gods who were never
threatened, never scared. Now I know
the opposite is true. They’ve spent so
long at the top, protected and isolated,
that they’ve forgotten they can fall. Their
strength has become their weakness.
    Once, I was afraid of these walls,
frightened by such beauty. But I see the
cracks now. It’s like the day of the
bombing, when I realized Silvers were
not invincible. Then it was an explosion
—now a few bullets have shattered
diamondglass, revealing fear and
paranoia beneath. Silvers fleeing from
Reds—lions running from mice. The
king and queen oppose each other, the
court has their own alliances, and Cal—
the perfect prince, the good soldier—is
a torturous, terrible enemy. Anyone can
betray anyone.
    Cal and Maven bid everyone good-
bye, doing their duty despite the
organized chaos. The airships wait not
far off, the whir of their engines audible
even inside. I want to see the great
machines up close, but moving would
mean braving the crowd, and I can’t
stomach the stares of the grief-stricken.
All together, twelve died last night, but I
refuse to learn their names. I can’t have
them weighing on me, not when I need
my wits more than ever.
    When I can’t watch any longer, my
feet take me where they will, wandering
through      now     familiar    passages.
Chambers close as I pass, being shut up
for the season, until the court returns. I
won’t, I know. Servants pull white
sheets over the furniture and paintings
and statues, until the whole place looks
haunted by ghosts.
    It’s not long before I find myself
standing in the doorway of Julian’s old
classroom, and the sight shocks me. The
stacks of books, the desk, even the maps
are gone. The room looks larger but
feels smaller. It once held whole worlds
but now holds only dust and crumpled
paper. My eyes linger on the wall where
the huge map used to be. Once I couldn’t
understand it; now I remember it like an
old friend.
    Norta, the Lakelands, Piedmont,
Prairie, Tiraxes, Montfort, Ciron, and
all the disputed lands in between. Other
countries, other peoples, all torn along
the lines of blood just like us. If we
change, will they? Or will they try to
destroy us too?
    “I hope you’ll remember your
lessons.” Julian’s voice draws me out of
my thoughts, back to the empty room. He
stands behind me, following my gaze to
the map wall. “I’m sorry I couldn’t teach
you more.”
    “We’ll have plenty of time for
Lessons in Archeon.”
    His smile is bittersweet and almost
painful to look at. With a jolt I realize I
can feel cameras watching us for the
very first time. “Julian?”
    “The archivists in Delphie have
offered me a position restoring some old
texts.” The lie is as plain as the nose on
his face. “Seems they’ve been digging
through the Wash and came on some
storage bunkers. Mountains to go
through, apparently.”
    “You’ll like that very much.” My
voice catches in my throat. You knew he
would have to leave. You forced him
into this last night, when you put his
life in danger for Kilorn’s . “Will you
visit, when you can?”
    “Yes, of course.” Another lie. Elara
will figure out his role soon enough, and
then he’ll be on the run. It only makes
sense to get a head start. “I’ve gotten you
something.”
    I’d rather have Julian than any gift,
but I try to look thankful anyways. “Is it
good advice?”
    He shakes his head, smiling. “You’ll
see when you get to the capital.” Then he
stretches out his arms, beckoning to me.
“I have to go, so send me off properly.”
    Hugging him is like hugging my
father or the brothers I’ll never see
again. I don’t want to let him go, but the
danger is too great for him to stay and
we both know it.
    “Thank you, Mare,” he whispers in
my ear. “You remind me so much of
her.” I don’t need to ask to know he’s
talking about Coriane, about the sister he
lost so long ago. “I’ll miss you, little
lightning girl.”
    Right now, the nickname doesn’t
sound so bad.

I don’t have the strength to marvel at the
boat, driven through the water by
electric engines. Black, silver, and red
flags flap from every pole, marking this
as the king’s ship. When I was a girl, I
use to wonder why the king laid claim to
our color. It was just so beneath him.
Now I realize the flags are red like his
flame, like the destruction—and the
people—he controls.
     “The Sentinels from last night have
been reassigned,” Maven mutters as we
walk along a deck.
     Reassigned is just a fancy word for
punished. Remembering Pig-Eyes and
the way he looked at me, I’m not sorry at
all. “Where did they go?”
     “The front, of course. They’ll be
attached to some rabble group, to
captain injured, incapable, or bad-
tempered soldiers. Those are usually the
first to be sent in a trench push.” By the
shadows behind his eyes, I can tell
Maven knows this firsthand.
     “The first to die.”
     He nods solemnly.
     “And Lucas? I haven’t seen him
since yesterday—”
     “He’s all right. Traveling with
House Samos, regrouping with family.
The shooting has everyone on their
heels, even the High Houses.”
     Relief washes over me, as well as
sadness. I miss Lucas already, but it’s
good to know he’s safe and far from
Elara’s prying.
    Maven bites his lip, looking
subdued. “But not for long. Answers are
coming.”
    “What do you mean?”
    “They found blood down in the cells.
Red blood.”
    My gunshot wound is gone, but the
memory of the pain has not faded. “So?”
    “So whichever friend of yours had
the misfortune to be wounded won’t be a
secret much longer, if the bloodbase
does its job.”
    “Bloodbase?”
    “The blood database. Any Red born
within a hundred miles of civilization
gets sampled at birth. Started out as a
project to understand exactly what the
difference is between us, but it ended up
just another way to put a collar on your
people. In the bigger cities, Reds don’t
use ID cards but blood tags. They’re
sampled at every gate, coming and
going. Tracked like animals.”
     Briefly, I think of the old documents
the king threw at me that day in the
throne room. My name, my photograph,
and a smear of blood were in there.
     My blood. They have my blood.
     “And they—they can figure out
whose blood it is, just like that?”
     “It takes some time, a week or so,
but yes, that’s how it’s supposed to
work.” His eyes fall to my shaking
hands, and he covers them with his own,
letting warmth bleed into my suddenly
cold skin. “Mare?”
    “He shot me,” I whisper. “The
Sentinel shot me. It’s my blood they
found.”
    And then his hands are just as cold
as mine.
    For all his clever ideas, Maven has
nothing to say to this. He just stares, his
breath coming in tiny, scared puffs. I
know the look on his face; I wear it
every time I’m forced to say good-bye to
someone.
    “It’s too bad we didn’t stay longer,”
I murmur, looking out at the river. “I
would have liked to die close to home.”
    Another breeze sends a curtain of my
hair across my face, but Maven brushes
it away and pulls me close with startling
ferocity.
    Oh.
    His kiss is not at all like his
brother’s. Maven is more desperate,
surprising himself as much as me. He
knows I’m sinking fast, a stone dropping
through the river. And he wants to
drown with me.
    “I will fix this,” he murmurs against
my lips. I have never seen his eyes so
bright and sharp. “I won’t let them hurt
you. You have my word.”
    Part of me wants to believe him.
“Maven, you can’t fix everything.”
    “You’re right, I can’t,” he replies, an
edge to his voice. “But I can convince
someone with more power than me.”
    “Who?”
    When the temperature around us
rises, Maven pulls back, his jaw tense
and clenched. The way his eyes flash, I
half expect him to attack whoever
interrupted us. I don’t turn around,
mostly because I can’t feel my limbs.
I’ve gone numb, though my lips still
tingle with memory. What this means, I
don’t know. What I feel, I can’t begin to
understand.
    “The queen requests your presence
on the viewing deck.” Cal’s voice grinds
like stone. He sounds almost angry, but
his bronze eyes look sad, defeated even.
“Passing the Stilts, Mare.”
    Yes, the shoreline is already familiar
to me. I know that mangled tree, that
stretch of bank, and the echo of saws and
falling trees is unmistakable. This is
home. With great pain, I force myself
away from the rail to face Cal, who
seems to be having a silent conversation
with his brother.
     “Thank you, Cal,” I murmur, still
trying to process Maven’s kiss and, of
course, my own impending doom.
     Cal walks away, his usually straight
back bowed. Each footfall sends a pang
of guilt through me, making me
remember our dance and our own kiss. I
hurt everyone, especially myself.
     Maven stares after his fleeing
brother. “He does not like to lose.
And”—he lowers his voice, now so
close to me I can see the tiny flecks of
silver in his eyes—“neither do I. I won’t
lose you, Mare. I won’t.”
    “You’ll never lose me.”
    Another lie, and we both know it.

The viewing deck dominates the front of
the ship, enclosed by glass stretching
from side to side. Brown shapes take
form on the riverbank, and the old hill
with the arena appears out of the trees.
We’re too far from the bank to see
anyone properly, but I know my house in
an instant. The old flag still flutters on
the porch, still embroidered with three
red stars. One has a black stripe through
it, in honor of Shade. Shade was
executed. You’re supposed to rip a star
off after that. But they didn’t. They held
on to him in their own little rebellion.
    I want to point my home out to
Maven, to tell him about the village. I’ve
seen his life, and now I want to show
him mine. But the viewing deck is silent,
all of us staring at the village as we
come closer and closer. The villagers
don’t care about you , I want to scream.
Only fools will stop to watch. Only the
fools will waste a moment on you.
    As the boat continues on, I begin to
think the whole village might be made of
fools. All two thousand of them seem
crowded onto the bank. Some stand
ankle-deep in the river. From this
distance, they all look the same. Fading
hair and worn clothes, blotchy skinned,
tired, hungry—all the things I used to be.
    And angry. Even from the boat, I can
feel their anger. They don’t cheer or call
out our names. No one waves. No one
even smiles.
    “What is this?” I breathe, expecting
no one to answer.
    But the queen does, with great relish.
“Such a waste, parading down the river
when no one will watch. It seems we’ve
fixed that.”
    Something tells me this is another
mandatory event, like the fights, like the
broadcasts. Officers tore sick elders
from their beds and exhausted workers
from the floor, forcing them to watch us.
    A whip cracks somewhere on the
bank, followed closely by a woman’s
scream. “Stay in line!” echoes over the
crowd. Their eyes never falter, staring
straight ahead, so still that I can’t even
see where the disruption was. What
happened to make them so lenient?
What has already been done?
    Tears prick at my eyes as I watch.
There are more cracks and a few babies
wail, but no one on the bank protests.
Suddenly I’m at the edge of the deck,
wanting to burst through the glass with
every inch of myself.
    “Going somewhere, Mareena?”
Elara purrs from her place next to the
king. She sips placidly at a drink,
surveying me over the rim of her glass.
    “Why are you doing this?”
    Arms crossed over her magnificent
gown, Evangeline eyes me with a sneer.
“Why do you care?” But her words fall
on deaf ears.
    “They know what happened at the
Hall, they might even agree with it, so
they need to see that we aren’t
defeated,” Cal murmurs, his eyes on the
riverbank. He can’t even look at me, the
coward. “We aren’t even bleeding.”
    Another whip cracks and I flinch,
almost feeling the lash on my skin. “Did
you order them to be beaten as well?”
    He doesn’t rise to my challenge, jaw
firmly clenched shut. But when another
villager cries out, protesting against the
officers, he lets his eyes close.
     “Stand back, Lady Titanos.” The
king’s voice rumbles like faraway
thunder, an order if there ever was one. I
can almost feel his smug smile when I
step away, moving back to Maven. “This
is a Red village, you know that better
than us all. They harbor these terrorists,
feed them, protect them, become them.
They are children who have done wrong.
And they must learn.”
     I open my mouth to argue, but the
queen bares her teeth. “Perhaps you
know of a few who should be made an
example of?” she says calmly, gesturing
to the shoreline.
     The words die in my throat, chased
away by her threat. “No, Your Majesty, I
don’t.”
    “Then stand back and be silent.”
Then she grins. “For your time to speak
will come.”
    This is what they need me for. A
moment like this, when the scales could
tip out of their favor. But I can’t protest.
I can only do as she commands and
watch as my home fades out of sight.
Forever.

The closer we get to the capital, the
larger the villages become. Soon the
landscape fades from lumber and
farming communities to proper towns.
They center around massive mills, with
brick homes and dormitories to house
the Red laborers. Like the other villages,
their inhabitants stand in the streets to
watch us pass. Officers bark, whips
crack, and I never get used to it. I flinch
every time.
    Then the towns are replaced by
sprawling estates and mansions, palaces
like the Hall. Made of stone and glass
and swirling marble, each one seems
more magnificent than the last. Their
lawns slope to the river, decorated with
greenwarden gardens and beautiful
fountains. The houses themselves look
like the work of gods, each one a
different kind of beautiful. But the
windows are dark, the doors closed.
Where the villages and towns were full
of people, these seem devoid of life.
Only the flags flying high, one over each
structure, let me know someone lives
there at all. Blue for House Osanos,
silver for Samos, brown for Rhambos,
and so on. Now I know the colors by
heart, putting faces to each silent home. I
even killed the owners of a few.
    “River Row,” Maven explains. “The
country residences, should a lord or lady
wish to escape the city.”
    My gaze lingers on the Iral home, a
columned wonder of black marble.
Stone panthers guard the porch, snarling
up at the sky. Even the statues put a chill
in me, making me remember Ara Iral and
her pressing questions.
    “There’s no one here.”
    “The houses are empty most of the
year, and no one would dare leave the
city now, not with this Guard business.”
He offers me a small, bitter smile. “They
would rather hide behind their diamond
walls and let my brother do their fighting
for them.”
    “If only no one had to fight at all.”
    He shakes his head. “It does no good
to dream.”
    We watch in silence as River Row
falls behind us and another forest rises
up on the banks. The trees are strange,
very tall with black bark and dark red
leaves. It is deathly quiet, as no forest
should be. Not even birdsong breaks the
silence, and overhead, the sky darkens,
but not from the waning afternoon light.
Black clouds gather, hovering over the
trees like a thick blanket.
    “And what’s this?” Even my voice
sounds muffled, and I’m suddenly glad
for the glass casing over the deck. To my
surprise the others have gone, leaving us
alone to watch the gloom settle.
    Maven glances at the forest, face
pulled in distaste. “Barrier trees. They
keep the pollution from traveling farther
upriver. The Welle greenwardens made
them years ago.”
    Choppy brown waves foam against
the boat, leaving a film of black grime
on the gleaming steel hull. The world
takes on a strange tint, like I’m looking
through dirty glass. The low-lying
clouds aren’t clouds at all but smoke
pouring from a thousand chimneys,
obscuring the sky. Gone are the trees and
the grass—this is a land of ash and
decay.
    “Gray Town,” Maven murmurs.
    Factories stretch out as far as I can
see, dirty and massive and humming with
electricity. It hits me like a fist, almost
knocking me off my feet. My heart tries
to keep up with the unearthly pulse and I
have to sit down, feeling my blood race.
    I thought my world was wrong, that
my life was unfair. But I could never
even dream of a place like Gray Town.
    Power stations glow in the gloom,
pulsing electric blue and sickly green
into the spider-work of wires in the air.
Transports piled high with cargo move
along the raised roads, shuttling goods
from one factory to another. They scream
at one another in a noisy mess of tangled
traffic, moving like sluggish black blood
in gray veins. Worst of all, little houses
surround each factory in an ordered
square, one on top of the other, with
narrow streets in between. Slums.
     Beneath such a smoky sky, I doubt
the workers ever see daylight. They
walk between the factories and their
homes, flooding the streets during a shift
change. There are no officers, no
cracking whips, no blank stares. No one
is making them watch us pass. The king
doesn’t need to show off here , I realize.
They are broken from birth.
    “These are the techies,” I whisper
hoarsely, remembering the name the
Silvers so blithely toss around. “They
make the lights, the cameras, the video
screens—”
    “The guns, the bullets, the bombs, the
ships, the transports,” Maven adds.
“They keep the power running. They
keep our water clean. They do
everything for us.”
    And they receive nothing but smoke
in return.
    “Why don’t they leave?”
    He just shrugs. “This is the only life
they know. Most techies will never
leave their own alley. They can’t even
conscript.”
    Can’t even conscript . Their lives
are so terrible that the war is a better
alternative, and they’re not even allowed
to go.
    Like everything else on the river, the
factories fade away, but the image stays
with me. I must not forget this,
something tells me. I must not forget
them.
    Stars wait for us beyond another
forest of barrier trees, and beneath them:
Archeon. At first I don’t see the capital
at all, mistaking its lights for blazing
stars. As we sail closer and closer, my
jaw drops.
    A triple-layered bridge runs across
the wide river, linking the two cities on
either side. It’s thousands of feet long
and thriving, alive with light and
electricity. There are shops and market
squares, all built into the Bridge itself a
hundred feet above the river. I can just
picture the Silvers up there, drinking and
eating and looking down on the world
from their place on high. Transports
blaze along the lowest tier of the Bridge,
their headlamps like red and white
comets cutting through the night.
    Both ends of the Bridge are gated,
and the city sectors on either side are
walled in. On the east bank, great metal
towers stab out of the ground like
swords to pierce the sky, all crowned
with gleaming giant birds of prey. More
transports and people populate the
paved streets that climb up the hilly
riverbanks, connecting the buildings to
the Bridge and the outer gates.
    The walls are diamondglass, like
back at the Hall, but set with floodlit
metal towers and other structures. There
are patrols on the walls, but their
uniforms are not the flaming red of
Sentinels or the stark black of Security.
They wear uniforms of clouded silver
and white, almost blending into the
cityscape. They are soldiers, and not
the kind who dance with ladies. This is
a fortress.
    Archeon was built to endure war, not
peace.
    On the western bank, I recognize the
Royal Court and the Treasury Hall from
the bombing footage. Both are made
from gleaming white marble and fully
repaired, even though they were attacked
barely more than a month ago. It feels
like a lifetime. They flank Whitefire
Palace, a building even I know on sight.
My old teacher used to say it was carved
from the hillside itself, a living piece of
the white stone. Flames made of gold
and pearl flash atop the surrounding
walls.
    I try to take it in, my eyes darting
between both ends of the Bridge, but my
mind just can’t fathom this place.
Overhead, airships move slowly through
the night sky, while airjets fly even
higher, as fast as shooting stars. I thought
the Hall of the Sun was a wonder;
apparently I never knew the meaning of
the word.
     But I can’t find anything beautiful
here, not when the smoky, dark factories
are only a few miles back. The contrast
between the Silver city and the Red slum
sets my teeth on edge. This is the world
I’m trying to bring down, the world
trying to kill me and everything I care
about. Now I truly see what I’m fighting
against and how difficult, how
impossible, it will be to win. I’ve never
felt smaller than I do now, with the great
bridge looming above us. It looks ready
to swallow me whole.
     But I have to try. If only for Gray
Town, for the ones who have never seen
the sun.
       TWENTY-THREE

By the time the boat docks at the
western bank and we’re back on land,
night has fallen. At home, this meant
shutting down the power and going to
sleep, but not in Archeon. If anything, the
city seems to brighten while the rest of
the world goes dark. Fireworks crackle
overhead, raining light down on the
Bridge, and atop Whitefire, a red-and-
black flag rises. The king is back on this
throne.
    Thankfully there are no more
pageants to suffer through; we are
greeted by armored transports to take us
up from the docks. To my delight, Maven
and I have a transport to ourselves,
joined by only two Sentinels. He points
out landmarks as we pass, explaining
what seems like every statue and street
corner. He even mentions his favorite
bakery, though it sits on the other side of
the river.
    “The Bridge and East Archeon are
for civilians, the common Silvers,
though many are richer than some
nobles.”
    “Common Silvers?” I almost have to
laugh. “There’s such a thing?”
    Maven just shrugs. “Of course.
They’re      merchants,       businessmen,
soldiers, officers, shop owners,
politicians, land barons, artists, and
intellectuals. Some marry into High
Houses, some rise above their station,
but they don’t have noble blood, and
their abilities aren’t as, well, powerful.”
    Not everyone is special. Lucas told
me that once. I didn’t know he meant
Silvers too.
    “Meanwhile, West Archeon is for
the court of the king,” Maven continues.
We pass a street lined with lovely stone
houses and pruned, flowering trees. “All
the High Houses keep residences here,
to be close to the king and government.
In fact, the entire country can be
controlled from this cliff, if the need
should arise.”
    That explains the location. The
western bank is sharply sloped, with the
palace and the other government
buildings sitting at the crest of a hill
overlooking the Bridge. Another wall
surrounds the hilltop, fencing in the heart
of the country. I try not to gawk when we
pass through the gate, revealing a tiled
square the size of an arena. Maven calls
it Caesar’s Square, after the first king of
his dynasty. Julian mentioned King
Caesar before, but fleetingly; our lessons
never got much further than the First
Divide, when red and silver became
much more than colors.
    Whitefire Palace occupies the
southern side of the Square, while the
courts, treasury, and administrative
centers take up the rest. There’s even a
military barracks, judging by the troops
drilling in the walled yard. They are
Cal’s Shadow Legion, who traveled
ahead of us to the city. A comfort to the
nobles, Maven called them. Soldiers
within the walls, to protect us if another
attack should come.
    Despite the hour, the Square bustles
with activity as people rush toward a
severe-looking structure next to the
barracks.         Red-and-black         flags,
emblazoned with the sword symbol of
the army, hang from its columns. I can
just see a little stage set up in front of the
building, with a podium surrounded by
bright spotlights and a growing crowd.
    Suddenly the gaze of cameras,
heavier than I’m used to, lands on our
transport, following us as the line of
vehicles passes by the stage. Luckily we
keep driving, moving through an
archway to a small courtyard, but then
we pull to a stop.
    “What’s this?” I whisper, grabbing
on to Maven. Until now, I’ve kept my
fear in check, but between the lights and
the cameras and the crowd, my wall
begins to crumble.
    Maven sighs heavily, more annoyed
than anything. “Father must be giving a
speech. Just some saber rattling to keep
the masses happy. The people love
nothing more than a leader promising
victory.”
    Maven steps out, pulling me along
with him. Despite my makeup and my
clothes, I feel suddenly very bare. This
is for a broadcast. Thousands, millions,
will see this.
     “Don’t worry, we just have to stand
and look stern,” he mutters in my ear.
     “I think Cal has that covered.” I nod
to where the prince broods, still attached
at the hip to Evangeline.
     Maven snickers to himself. “He
thinks speeches are a waste of time. Cal
likes action, not words.”
     That makes two of us, but I don’t
want to admit I have anything in common
with Maven’s older brother. Maybe
once, I thought so, but not now. Not ever
again.
    A bustling secretary beckons us. His
clothes are blue and gray, the colors of
House Macanthos. Maybe he knew the
colonel; maybe he was her brother, her
cousin. Don’t, Mare. This is the last
place to lose your nerve. He doesn’t
spare a glance at us when we fall into
place, standing behind Cal and
Evangeline, with the king and queen at
the head. Strangely, Evangeline is not
her usual cool self; I can see her hands
shaking. She’s afraid. She wanted the
spotlight, she wanted to be Cal’s bride,
and yet she’s scared of it. How can that
be?
    And then we’re moving, walking into
a building with too many Sentinels and
attendants to count. Inside, the structure
is built for function, with maps and
offices and council rooms instead of
paintings or salons. People in gray
uniforms busy themselves in the hall,
though they stop to let us pass. Most of
the doors are closed, but I manage to
catch a glimpse inside a few. Officers
and soldiers look down at maps of the
war front, arguing over the placement of
legions. Another room spilling with
thunderous energy seems to hold a
hundred video screens, each one
operated by a soldier in battle uniform.
They speak into headsets, barking orders
to faraway people and places. The
words differ, but the meaning is the
same.
     “Hold the line.”
     Cal lingers before the door to the
video room, craning his neck to get a
better look, but it suddenly slams in his
face. He bristles but doesn’t protest,
falling back into line with Evangeline.
She mutters to him quietly, but he shakes
her off, to my delight.
     But my smile fades as we step back
out into blinding lights on the front steps
of the structure. A bronze plaque next to
the door reads War Command . This
place is the heart of the military—every
soldier, every army, every gun is
controlled from within. My stomach
rolls at the power here, but I can’t lose
my nerve, not in front of so many.
Cameras flash, blinding my sight. When I
flinch, I hear a voice inside my head.
     The secretary presses a paper in my
hand. One glance at it, and I almost
scream. Now I know what I was saved
for.
     Earn your keep, Elara’s voice
whispers in my head. She glances at me
from Maven’s other side, doing her best
not to grin.
     Maven follows her wretched gaze
and notes the paper in my shaking hand.
Slowly, he winds his fingers around my
own, as if he could pour his strength into
me. I want nothing more than to rip the
paper in two, but he holds me steady.
     “You must,” is all he says,
whispering so low I can barely hear him.
“You must.”

“My heart grieves for the lives lost, but
know that they were not lost in vain.
Their blood will fuel our resolve and
drive us to overcome the difficulties
ahead. We are a nation at war, we have
been for nearly a century, and we are not
unaccustomed to obstacles in the path to
victory. These people will be found,
these people will be punished, and this
disease they call rebellion will never
take hold in my country.”
    The video screen in my new
bedroom is about as useful as a
bottomless boat, playing the king’s
speech from last night in a nauseating
loop. By now I can recite the whole
thing word for word, but I can’t stop
watching. Because I know who comes
next.
    My face looks strange on the screen,
too pale, too cold. I still can’t believe I
kept a straight face while I read the
words. When I step up to the podium,
taking the king’s place, I don’t even
tremble.
    “I was raised by Reds. I believed I
was one. And I saw firsthand the grace
of His Majesty the king, the just ways of
our Silver lords, and the great privilege
they gave us. The right to work, to serve
our country, to live and live well.” On-
screen, Maven puts a hand on my arm.
He nods along with my speech. “Now I
know I am Silver born, a lady of House
Titanos, and one day, a princess of
Norta. My eyes have been opened. A
world I never dreamed of exists, and it
is invincible. It is merciful. And these
terrorists, murderers of the most evil
kind, are trying to destroy the bedrock of
our nation. This we cannot allow.”
    In the safety of my room, I heave a
ragged breath. The worst is coming.
    “In his wisdom, King Tiberias has
drafted the Measures, to root out this
sickness of rebellion, and to protect the
good citizens of our nation. They are as
follows: As of today, a sunset curfew is
in effect for all Reds. Security will be
doubled in every Red village and town.
New outposts will be built on the roads
and manned to full capacity. All Red
crimes, including breaking of the curfew,
will be punished by execution. And”—at
this, my voice falters for the first time
—“conscription age has been lowered,
to the age of fifteen. Anyone who
provides information leading to capture
of Scarlet Guard operatives or the
prevention of Scarlet Guard actions will
be awarded conscription waivers,
releasing up to five members of the same
family from military service.”
    It’s a brilliant, and terrible,
maneuver. Reds will tear each other
apart for such waivers.
    “The Measures are to be upheld at
all costs until the disease known as the
Scarlet Guard is destroyed.” I stare into
my own eyes on-screen, watching as I
stop myself from choking on my speech.
My eyes are wide, hoping my people
know what I’m trying to say. Words can
lie. “Long live the king.”
     Anger ripples through me, and the
screen shorts out, replacing my face with
a black void. But I can still see each
new order in my mind. More officers
patrolling, more bodies hanging from the
gallows, and more mothers weeping for
their stolen children. We killed a dozen
of theirs, and they kill a thousand of
ours. Part of me knows these blows will
drive some Reds to the side of the
Guard, but many more will side with the
king. For their lives, for their children’s
lives, they will give up what little
freedom they had left.
    I thought being their puppet would be
easy compared to everything else. I was
so wrong. But I cannot let them break
me, not now. Not even when my own
doom lingers on the horizon. I must do
everything I can until my blood is
matched and my game is over. Until they
drag me away and kill me.
    At least my window faces the river,
looking south toward the sea. When I
stare at the water, I can ignore my fading
future. My eyes trail from the swiftly
moving current to the dark smudge on the
horizon. While the rest of the sky is
clear, dark clouds hover in the south,
never moving from the forbidden land at
the coast. The Ruined City. Radiation
and fire consumed the city once and
never let it go. Now it’s nothing but a
black ghost sitting just out of reach, a
relic of the old world.
     Part of me wishes Lucas would rap
on my door and hurry me along to a new
schedule, but he has not returned yet. I
suppose he’s better off without me
risking his life.
     Julian’s gift sits against the wall, a
firm reminder of another friend lost. It’s
a piece of the giant map, framed and
gleaming behind glass. When I pick it
up, something thumps to the ground,
falling from the back of the frame.
     I knew it.
    My heart races, beating wildly as I
drop to my knees, hoping to find some
secret note from Julian. But instead,
there’s nothing more than a book.
    Despite my disappointment, I can’t
help smiling. Of course Julian would
leave me another story, another
collection of words to comfort me when
he no longer can.
    I flip open the cover, expecting to
find some new histories, but instead,
handwritten words stare up at me from
the title page. Red and silver. It’s in
Julian’s unmistakable swirling scrawl.
    The sight line of my room’s cameras
beat into my back, reminding me I am not
alone. Julian knew that too. Brilliant
Julian.
    The book looks normal, a dull study
of relics found in Delphie, but hidden
among the words, in the same type, is a
secret worth telling. It takes me many
minutes to find every added line and I’m
quietly grateful I woke up so early.
Finally I have them all, and I seem to
have forgotten how to breathe.
    Dane Davidson, Red soldier, Storm
Legion, killed on routine patrol, body
never recovered. August 1, 296 NE.
Jane Barbaro, Red soldier, Storm
Legion, killed by friendly fire, body
cremated. November 19, 297 NE. Pace
Gardner, Red soldier, Storm Legion,
executed for insubordination, body
misplaced. June 4, 300 NE. There are
more names, stretching over the last
twenty years, all of them cremated or
their bodies lost or “misplaced.” How
anyone can misplace an executed man, I
don’t know. The name at the end of the
list makes my eyes water. Shade
Barrow, Red soldier, Storm Legion,
executed for desertion, body cremated.
July 27, 320 NE.
    Julian’s own words follow my
brother’s name, and I feel like he’s next
to me again, slowly and calmly teaching
his lesson.

       According to military law,
   all Red soldiers are to be buried
   in the cemeteries of the Choke.
   Executed soldiers have no
burials and lie in mass graves.
Cremation is not common.
Misplaced         bodies      are
nonexistent. And yet I found 27
names, 27 soldiers, your
brother included, who suffered
these fates.
    All died on patrol, killed by
Lakelanders or their own units,
if not executed for charges
without      base.    All    were
transferred to the Storm Legion
weeks before dying. And all of
their bodies were destroyed or
lost in some way. Why? The
Storm Legion is not a death
squad—hundreds of Reds serve
under General Eagrie without
dying strangely. So why kill
these 27?
    For once, I was glad for the
bloodbase. Even though they
are long “dead,” their blood
samples still remain. And now I
must apologize, Mare, for I
have not been entirely honest
with you. You trusted me to
train you, to help you, and I did,
but I was also helping myself. I
am a curious man, and you are
the most curious thing I have
ever seen. I couldn’t help
myself. I compared your blood
sample to theirs, only to find an
identical marker in them,
different from all others.
    I’m not surprised no one
noticed, because they were not
looking for it. But now that I
knew, it was easy to find. Your
blood is red, but it is not the
same. There is something new in
you, something no one has seen
before. And it was in 27 others.
A mutation, a change that may
be the key to everything you
are.
    You are not the only one,
Mare. You are not alone. You
are simply the first protected by
the eyes of a thousand, the first
they could not kill and hide
away. Like the others, you are
   Red and Silver, and stronger
   than both.
       I think you are the future. I
   think you are the new dawn.
       And if there were 27 before,
   there must be others. There
   must be more.

   I feel frozen; I feel numb; I feel
everything and nothing. Others like me.

       Using the mutations in your
   blood, I searched the rest of the
   bloodbase, finding the same in
   other samples. I have included
   them all here, for you to pass
   on.
       I know I don’t need to tell
   you the importance of this list,
   of what it could mean to you
   and the rest of this world. Pass
   it on to someone you trust, find
   the others, protect them, train
   them, for it is only a matter of
   time before someone less
   friendly discovers what I have—
   and hunts them down.

     His words end there, followed by a
list that makes my fingers tremble. There
are names and locations, so many of
them, all waiting to be found. All
waiting to fight.
     My mind feels like it’s on fire.
Others. More. Julian’s words swim
across my eyes, searing into my soul.
   Stronger than both.

The little book sits snugly in my jacket,
tucked in next to my heart. But before I
can go to Maven, to show him Julian’s
discovery, Cal finds me. He corners me
in a sitting room quite like the one we
danced in, though the moon and the
music are long gone. Once I wanted
everything he could give me, and now
the sight of him turns my stomach. He
can see the revulsion in my face, as
much as I try to hide it.
    “You’re angry with me,” he says. It’s
not a question.
    “I’m not.”
    “Don’t lie,” he growls, eyes
suddenly on fire. I’ve been lying since
the day we met. “Three days ago you
kissed me, and now you can’t even look
at me.”
    “I’m betrothed to your brother,” I tell
him, pulling away.
    He dismisses the point with the
wave of a hand. “That didn’t stop you
before. What’s changed?”
    I’ve seen who you really are , I want
to    scream. You’re not the gentle
warrior, the perfect prince, or even the
confused boy you pretend to be. As
much as you try to fight it, you’re just
like all of them.
    “Is this about the terrorists?”
    My teeth grit together painfully.
“Rebels.”
    “They murdered people, children,
innocents.”
    “You and I both know that wasn’t
their fault,” I spit back, not bothering to
care how cruel the words are. Cal
flinches, stunned for a moment. He
almost looks sick as he remembers the
Sun Shooting—and the accidental
explosion that followed. But it passes,
slowly replaced by anger.
    “But they caused it all the same,” he
growls. “What I ordered the Sentinel to
do, was for the dead, for justice.”
    “And what did torture get you? Do
you know their names, how many there
are? Do you even know what they want?
Have you even bothered to listen?”
    He heaves a sigh, trying to salvage
the conversation. “I know you have your
own reasons for—for sympathizing, but
their methods cannot be—”
     “Their methods are your own fault.
You make us work, you make us bleed,
you make us die for your wars and
factories and the little comforts you
don’t even notice, all because we are
different. How can you expect us to let
that stand?”
     Cal fidgets, a muscle in his cheek
twitching. He has no answer to that.
     “The only reason I’m not dead in a
trench somewhere is because you pitied
me. The only reason you’re even
listening to me now is because, by some
insane miracle, I happen to be another
kind of different.”
    Lazily, my sparks rise in my hands. I
can’t imagine going back to life before
my body hummed with power, but I can
certainly remember it.
    “You can stop this, Cal. You will be
king, and you can stop this war, you can
save          thousands, millions,    from
generations of glorified slavery, if you
say enough.”
    Something breaks in Cal, quenching
the fire he tries so hard to hide. He
crosses to the window, hands clasped
behind his back. With the rising sun on
his face and shadow on his back, he
seems torn between two worlds. In my
heart, I know he is. The little part of me
that still cares about him wants to close
the distance between us, but I am not that
foolish. I’m not a little lovesick girl.
    “I thought that once,” he mutters.
“But it would lead to rebellion on both
sides, and I will not be the king who
ruins this country. This is my legacy, my
father’s legacy, and I have a duty to it.”
A slow heat rumbles from him, steaming
the glass window. “Would you trade a
million deaths for what they want?”
    A million deaths. My mind flashes
back to Belicos Lerolan’s corpse, with
his dead children at his side. And then
other faces join the dead—Shade,
Kilorn’s father, every Red soldier who
died for their war.
    “The Guard won’t stop,” I say softly,
but I know he’s barely listening
anymore. “And while they are certainly
to blame, you are as well. There is
blood on your hands, Prince.” And
Maven’s. And mine.
    I leave him standing there, hoping
I’ve changed him but knowing those
odds are slim at best. He is his father’s
son.
    “Julian’s disappeared, hasn’t he?”
he calls out to me, stopping me in my
tracks.
    I turn slowly, mulling over what I
can possibly say. I decide to play dumb.
“Disappeared?”
    “The escape left holes in the
memories of many Sentinels, as well as
the video logs. My uncle does not use
his abilities often, but I know the signs.”
    “You think he helped them escape?”
    “I do,” he says painfully, looking at
his hands. “That’s why I gave him
enough time to slip away.”
    “You did what?” I can’t believe my
ears. Cal, the soldier, the one who
always follows orders, breaking the
rules for Julian.
    “He’s my uncle, I did what I could
for him. How heartless do you think I
am?” He smirks sadly at me, not waiting
for an answer. It makes me ache. “I
delayed the arrest as long as I could, but
everyone leaves tracks, and the queen
will find him,” he sighs, putting a hand
against the glass. “And he’ll be
executed.”
    “You’d do that to your uncle?” I
don’t bother to hide my disgust, or the
fear beneath. If he’ll kill Julian, even
after letting him go, what will he do to
me when I’m found out?
    Cal’s shoulders tighten as he
straightens, morphing back into the
soldier. He will hear no more of Julian
or the Scarlet Guard.
    “Maven      had      an    interesting
proposition.”
    That was unexpected. “Oh?”
    He nods, oddly annoyed at the
thought of his brother. “Mavey’s always
been a quick thinker. He got that from his
mother.”
    “Is that supposed to scare me?” I
know better than any that Maven is
nothing like his mother, or any other
damned Silver. “What are you trying to
say, Cal?”
    “You’re in the open now,” he blurts
out. “After your speech, the entire
country knows your name and face. And
so more will wonder who and what you
are.”
    I can only scowl and shrug. “Maybe
you should’ve thought of that before you
made me read that disgusting speech.”
    “I’m a soldier, not a politician. You
know I had nothing to do with the
Measures.”
    “But you’ll follow them. You’ll
follow them without question.”
    He doesn’t argue that. For all his
faults, Cal won’t lie to me. Not now.
“All records of you have been removed.
Officers, archivists, no one will ever
find proof you were born Red,” he
murmurs, eyes on the floor. “That is
what Maven proposed.”
    Despite my anger, I gasp aloud. The
bloodbase. The records . “What does
that mean?” I don’t have the strength to
keep my voice from shaking.
    “Your      school    record,     birth
certificate, blood prints, even your ID
card have been destroyed.” I barely hear
him over the sound of my hammering
heartbeat.
    Once, I would have hugged him
outright. But I must remain still. I must
not let Cal know he has saved me again.
No, not Cal. This was Maven’s doing.
This was the shadow controlling the
flame.
    “That sounds like the right thing to
do,” I say aloud, trying to sound
uninterested.
    But my act can only last so long.
After one stiff bow in Cal’s direction, I
hurry from the room, hiding my wild
grin.
        TWENTY-FOUR

I spend much of the next day exploring,
though my mind is somewhere else.
Whitefire is older than the Hall, its
walls made of stone and carved wood
rather than diamondglass. I doubt I’ll
ever learn the layout of the whole thing,
as it holds not just the royal residence
but many administrative offices and
chambers, ballrooms, a full training
court, and other things I don’t
understand. I guess that’s why it takes
the secretary nearly a half hour to find
me, wandering through a gallery of
statues. But I won’t have more time to
explore. I have duties to fulfill.
     Duties, according to the king’s
chatting secretary, that apply to a whole
range of evils beyond just reading the
Measures. As a future princess, I must
meet the people in arranged outings,
making speeches and shaking hands and
standing by Maven’s side. The last part
doesn’t really bother me, but being put
on parade like a goat at auction isn’t
exactly exciting.
     I join Maven in a transport, headed
for the first appearance. I’m itching to
tell him about the list and thank him for
the bloodbase, but there are too many
eyes and ears.
     The majority of the day speeds by in
a blur of noise and color as we tour
different parts of the capital. The Bridge
Market reminds me of Grand Garden,
though it’s three times the size. In the
single hour we spend greeting children
and shopkeepers, I see the Silvers
assault or aggravate dozens of Red
servants, all trying to do their jobs.
Security keeps them from all-out abuse,
but the words they sling are almost as
hurtful. Child killers, animals, devils.
Maven keeps his grip tight on my hand,
squeezing every time a Red is knocked
to the ground. When we reach our next
stop, an art gallery, I’m glad to be out of
the public eye, until I see the paintings.
The Silver artist uses two colors, silver
and red, in a horrifying collection that
makes me sick. Each painting is worse
than the last, depicting Silver strength
and Red weakness in every brushstroke.
The last one depicts a gray-and-silver
figure, quite like a ghost, and the crown
on his brow bleeds crimson. It makes me
want to put my head through a wall.
     The plaza outside the gallery is
noisy, bustling with city life. Many stop
to stare, gawking at us as we head for
our transport. Maven waves with a
practiced smile, causing the crowd to
cheer his name. He’s good at this; after
all, these people are his birthright. When
he stoops to speak with a few children,
his smile brightens. Cal might be born
to rule, but Maven was meant for it.
And Maven is willing to change the
world for us, for the Reds he was raised
to spit on.
    I surreptitiously touch the list in my
pocket, thinking of the ones who can
help Maven and me change the world.
Are they like me, or are they as varied
as the Silvers? Shade was like you.
They knew about Shade and had to kill
him, like they could not kill you. My
heart aches for my fallen brother, for the
conversations we might have had. For
the future we might have forged.
    But Shade is dead, and there are
others who need my help.
    “We need to find Farley,” I whisper
in Maven’s ear, barely audible to
myself. But he hears me and raises an
eyebrow in silent question. “I have to
give her something.”
     “I have no doubt she’ll find us,” he
mutters back, “if she isn’t watching
already.”
     “How—?”
     Farley, spying on us? Inside a city
that wants her torn apart? It seems
impossible. But then I notice the Silver
crowd pressing in, and the Red servants
beyond. A few linger to watch us, their
arms banded with red. Any one of them
could work for Farley. They all could.
Even with the Sentinels and Security all
around, she’s still with us.
     Now the question becomes finding
t h e right Red, saying the right thing,
finding the right place, and doing it all
without anyone noticing the prince and
his future princess communicating with a
wanted terrorist.
    This isn’t like the crowds at home,
the ones I could move through so easily.
Now I stand out, a future princess
surrounded by guards, with a rebellion
resting on her shoulders. And maybe
even something more important, I think,
remembering the list of names in my
jacket.
    When the crowd pushes in, craning
to look at us, I take my chance and slip
away. The Sentinels bunch around
Maven, still not used to guarding me as
well, and with a few quick turns, I’m out
of the circle of guards and onlookers.
They continue across the plaza without
me, and if Maven notices I’m gone, he
doesn’t stop them.
     The Red servants don’t acknowledge
me, their heads down as they buzz
between shops. They keep to alleys and
shadows, trying to stay out of sight. I’m
so busy searching the Red faces that I
don’t notice the one at my elbow.
     “My lady, you dropped this,” the
little boy says. He’s probably ten years
old, with one arm banded with red. “My
lady?”
     Then I notice the scrap he holds out.
It’s nothing, just a twisted bit of paper I
don’t remember having. Still, I smile for
the boy and take it from him. “Thank you
very much.”
    He grins at me, smiling as only a
child can, before bounding away into an
alley. He bounces with every step. Life
has not dragged him down yet.
    “This way, Lady Titanos.” A
Sentinel stands over me, watching with
flat eyes. So much for that plan. I let
him lead me back to the transport,
feeling suddenly dejected. I can’t even
sneak away like I used to. I’m getting
soft.
    “What was that all about?” Maven
wonders as I slide back into the
transport.
    “Nothing,” I sigh, casting a glance
out the window as we pull away from
the plaza. “Thought I saw someone.”
    We’re around a bend in the street
before I even think to look at the little
paper. I unfold it in my lap, hiding the
scrap in the folds of my sleeve. There
are words scrawled across the slip, so
small I can barely read them.

        Hexaprin            Theater.
    Afternoon play. The best seats.

   It takes me a moment to realize I only
understand half those words, but that
doesn’t matter at all. Smiling, I press the
message into Maven’s hand.

Maven’s request is all it takes to get us
into the theater. It’s small but very grand,
with a green domed roof crowned by a
black swan. It’s a place of entertainment,
showing plays or concerts or even some
archive films on special occasions. A
play, as Maven tells me, is when people,
actors, perform a story on a stage. Back
home we didn’t have time for bedtime
fairy tales, let alone stages and actors
and costumes.
    Before I know it, we’re sitting on a
closed balcony above the stage. The
seats below us teem with people, many
of them children, all of them Silver. A
few Reds rove between the rows and
aisles, serving drinks or taking tickets,
but none sit down. This is not a luxury
they can afford. Meanwhile, we sit on
velvet chairs with the best view, with
the secretary and the Sentinels standing
just beyond our curtained door.
    When the theater darkens, Maven
throws an arm across my shoulders,
pulling me so close I can feel his
heartbeat. He smirks at the secretary,
now peeking between the curtains.
“Don’t disturb us,” he drawls, and he
pulls my face to his.
    The door clicks behind us, locking
shut, but neither of us pulls away. A
minute or an hour passes, which I don’t
know, until voices onstage bring me
back to reality. “Sorry,” I mutter to
Maven, standing up out of my chair in an
effort to put some distance between us.
There’s no time for kissing now, no
matter how much I might want to. He
only smirks, watching me instead of the
play. I do my best to look elsewhere, but
something always draws my eyes back
to him.
    “What do we do now?”
    He laughs to himself, eyes glinting
mischievously.
    “That’s not what I meant.” But I
can’t help but smirk with him.
    “Cal cornered me earlier.”
    Maven’s lips purse, tightening at the
thought. “And?”
    “It seems I’ve been saved.”
    His resulting grin could light the
world entire, and I’m seized by the need
to kiss him again. “I told you I would,”
he says, his voice oddly rough. When his
hand reaches for mine, I take it without
question.
     Before we can continue, the ceiling
panel above us scrapes away. Maven
jumps to his feet, more startled than I
am, and peers into the black space above
us. Not even a whisper filters down, but
all the same, I know what to do. Training
has made me stronger, and I pull myself
up with ease, disappearing into the dark
and cold. I can’t see anything or anyone,
but I’m not afraid. Excitement rules me
now, and with a smile, I reach down a
hand to help Maven. He scrambles up
into the darkness and tries to get his
bearings. Before our eyes adjust, the
ceiling panel slides back into place,
shutting out the light and the play and the
people beyond.
     “Be quick and quiet. I’ll take you
from here.”
     It’s not the voice I recognize but the
smell: an overpowering mixture of tea,
old spices, and a familiar blue candle.
     “Will?” My voice almost cracks.
“Will Whistle?”
     Slowly but surely, the darkness
becomes easier to manage. His white
beard, tangled as ever, comes into dim
focus. There’s no mistaking it now.
     “No time for reunions, little
Barrow,” he says. “We have work to
do.”
     How Will came to be here, traveling
all the way from the Stilts, I don’t know,
but his intimate knowledge of the theater
is even more peculiar. He leads us
through the ceiling, down ladders and
steps and little trapdoors, all with the
play echoing overhead. It’s not long
before we’re belowground, with brick
supports and metal beams stretching high
above us.
    “You people sure like to be
dramatic,” Maven mutters, eyeing the
gloom around us. It looks like a crypt,
dark and damp, where every shadow
holds a horror.
    Will barely laughs as he shoulders
open a metal door. “Just you wait.”
    We tramp through the narrow
passage, sloping downward even
farther. The air smells faintly of sewage.
To my surprise, the path ends in a small
platform, lit by only a burning torch. It
casts strange shadows on a crumbling
wall set with broken tiles. There are
black markings on them, letters, but not
from any language I can read.
    Before I can ask about them, a great
screeching sound shakes the walls
around us. It comes from a round hole in
the wall, rumbling up from even greater
darkness. Maven grabs my hand, startled
by the sound, and I’m just as frightened
as him. Metal scrapes on metal, an
earsplitting noise. Bright lights stream
out of the tunnel and I can feel something
coming, something big and electric and
powerful.
    A metal worm appears, coasting to a
stop in front of us. The sides are raw
metal, welded and bolted together, with
slit-like windows. A door slides open
on shrieking tracks, spilling a warm
glow onto the platform.
     Farley smiles to us from a seat
inside the door. She waves a hand,
gesturing for us to join her. “All
aboard.”
     “The techies call it the Undertrain,”
she says as we shakily take our seats.
“Remarkably fast, and it runs on the
ancient tracks the Silvers never bothered
to look for.”
     Will shuts the door behind us,
slamming us into what feels like nothing
more than a long tin can. If I weren’t so
worried about the under-thing crashing,
I’d be impressed. Instead, I tighten my
grip on the seat below me.
     “Where did you build this?” Maven
wonders aloud, his eyes sweeping over
the wretched cage. “Gray Town is
controlled, the techies work for—”
     “We have techies and tech towns of
our own, little prince,” Farley says,
looking very proud of herself. “What you
Silvers know about the Guard couldn’t
fill a teacup.”
     The train lurches beneath us, almost
tossing me from my seat, but no one else
even bats an eye. It slides along until it
reaches a speed that smacks my stomach
into my spine. The others continue
chattering, mostly Maven asking
questions about the Undertrain and the
Guard. I’m glad no one asks me to
speak, because I’ll certainly throw up or
pass out if I do much more than sit still.
But not Maven. Nothing gets by him.
    He glances out the window, gleaning
something from the rock blurring past.
“We’re heading south.”
    Farley sits back in her seat, nodding.
“Yes.”
    “The south is radiated,” he barks,
staring down at her.
    She barely shrugs.
    “Where are you taking us?” I
murmur, finally finding my voice.
    Maven doesn’t waste any time,
moving for the closed door. No one
stops him because there’s nowhere for
him to go. No escape.
    “You know what it does?
Radiation?” He sounds truly afraid.
    Farley begins to tick off the
symptoms on her fingers, a maddening
smile still on her face. “Nausea,
vomiting, headache, seizures, cancerous
diseases, and, oh yes, death. A very
unpleasant death.”
    Suddenly I feel very sick. “Why are
you doing this? We’re here to help you.”
    “Mare, stop the train, you can stop
the train.” Maven drops in front of me,
grabbing me by the shoulders. “Stop the
train!”
    To my surprise, the tin can squeals
around us, coming to a very sharp and
sudden stop. Maven and I tumble to the
floor in a tangle of limbs, hitting the hard
metal deck with a painful thunk. Lights
beam down at us from the open door,
revealing another platform lit by torches.
It’s much larger and leads far back out of
sight.
     Farley steps over the pair of us
without so much as a glance and trots
onto the platform. “Aren’t you coming?”
     “Don’t move, Mare. This place will
kill us!”
     Something whines in my ears, almost
drowning out Farley’s cold laugh. As I
sit up, I can see she’s waiting patiently
for both of us.
     “How do you know the south, the
Ruins, are still radiated?” she asks with
a mad smile.
     Maven trips over the words. “We
have machines, detectors, they tell us—”
     Farley nods. “And who built those
machines?”
     “Techies,” Maven croaks, “Reds.”
Finally, he understands what she’s
getting at. “The detectors lie.”
     Grinning, Farley nods and extends a
hand, helping him off the floor. He keeps
his eyes on her, still wary, but allows
her to lead us out onto the platform and
up an iron set of stairs. Sunlight streams
in from above, and fresh air swirls down
to mix with the murky vapors of the
underground.
     Then we’re blinking in the open air,
staring up at low-lying fog. Walls rise
all around, supporting a ceiling that no
longer exists. Only pieces of it remain,
little bits of aquamarine and gold. As my
eyes adjust, I can see tall shadows in the
sky, their tops disappearing into the
haze. The streets, wide black rivers of
asphalt, are cracked and sprouting gray
weeds a hundred years old. Trees and
bushes grow over concrete, reclaiming
little pockets and corners, but even more
have been cleared away. Shattered glass
crunches under my feet and clouds of
dust drift in the wind, but somehow this
place, the picture of neglect, doesn’t feel
abandoned. I know this place from the
histories, from the books and old maps.
    Farley puts an arm around my
shoulders, her smile wide and white.
    “Welcome to the City of Ruins, to
Naercey,” she says, using the old name
forgotten long ago.

The ruined island contains special
markers around the borders, to trick the
radiation detectors the Silvers use to
survey the old battlefields. This is how
they protect it, the home of the Scarlet
Guard. In Norta, at least. That’s what
Farley said, hinting at more bases across
the country. And soon, it will be the
sanctuary of every Red refugee fleeing
the king’s new punishments.
    Every building we pass looks
decrepit, coated in ash and weeds, but
upon      closer    inspection,    there’s
something much more. Footprints in the
dust, a light in a window, the smell of
cooking wafting up from a drain. People,
Reds, have a city of their own right here,
hiding in plain sight. Electricity is
scarce but smiles are not.
    The half-collapsed building Farley
leads us to must’ve been some kind of
café once, judging by the rust-eaten
tables and ripped-up booth seats. The
windows have long since disappeared,
but the floor is clean. A woman sweeps
dust out the door, into neat piles on the
broken sidewalk. I would be daunted by
such a task, knowing that there is so
much left to sweep away, but she carries
on with a smile, humming to herself.
    Farley nods at the cleaning woman,
and she hurries away, leaving us in
peace. To my delight, the booth closest
to us holds a familiar face.
    Kilorn, safe and whole. He even has
the audacity to wink. “Long time no
see.”
    “There’s no time to get cute,” Farley
growls, taking a seat next to him. She
gestures for us to follow and we do,
sliding into the squeaky booth. “I take it
you saw the villages on your cruise
down the river?”
    My smile quickly fades, as does
Kilorn’s. “Yes.”
    “And the new laws? I know you’ve
heard about them.” Her eyes harden, like
it’s my fault I was forced to read the
Measures.
     “This is what happens when you
threaten a beast,” Maven mutters,
jumping to my defense.
     “But now they know our name.”
     “Now they’re hunting you,” Maven
snaps, bringing a fist down on the table.
It shakes the thin layer of dust, sending
floating clouds into the air. “You waved
a red flag in front of a bull but didn’t do
much more than poke at him.”
     “They’re frightened though,” I pipe
in. “They’ve learned to fear you. That
has to count for something.”
     “It counts for nothing if you slink
back into your hidden city and let them
regroup. You’re giving the king and the
army time. My brother is already on
your trail, and it won’t be long until he
tracks you down.” Maven stares at his
hands, strangely angry. “Soon staying
one step ahead won’t be enough. It won’t
even be possible.”
    Farley’s eyes glimmer in the light as
she surveys us both, thinking. Kilorn is
content to draw circles in dust,
seemingly unmoved. I fight the urge to
kick him under the table to make him pay
attention.
    “I couldn’t care less about my own
safety, Prince,” Farley says. “It’s the
people in the villages, the workers and
the soldiers, who I care about. They’re
the ones being punished right now, and
harshly.”
     My thoughts fly to my family and the
Stilts, remembering the dull look in a
thousand eyes as we passed. “What have
you heard?”
     “Nothing good.”
     Kilorn’s head jerks up, though his
fingers still swirl on the table. “Double
work shifts, Sunday hangings, mass
graves. It’s not pretty for the ones who
can’t keep up the pace.” He’s
remembering our village, just like I am.
“Our people at the war front say it isn’t
much different up there either. The
fifteen- and sixteen-year-olds are being
put into their own legion. They won’t
survive for long.”
     His fingers draw an X in the dust,
angrily marking what he feels.
    “I can stall that, maybe,” Maven
says, brainstorming out loud. “If I
convince the war council to hold them
back, put them through extra training.”
    “That’s not enough.” My voice is
small but firm. The list seems to burn
against my skin, begging to be let free. I
turn to Farley. “You have people all
over, don’t you?”
    I don’t miss the shadow of
satisfaction cross her face. “I do.”
    “Then give them these names.” I pull
Julian’s book from my jacket, opening to
the beginning of the list. “And find
them.”
    Maven gently takes the book, his
eyes scanning over it. “There must be
hundreds,” he mutters, not looking away
from the page. “What is this?”
    “They’re like me. Red and Silver,
and stronger than both.”
    It’s my turn to feel smug. Even
Maven’s jaw drops. Farley snaps her
fingers, and he hands it over without a
thought, still staring at the little book that
holds such a powerful secret.
    “It won’t be long until the wrong
person figures this out, though,” I add.
“Farley, you must find them first.”
    Kilorn glares at the names like they
offer him some kind of insult. “This
could take months, years.”
    Maven huffs. “We don’t have that
kind of time.”
    “Exactly,” Kilorn agrees. “We need
to act now.”
    I shake my head. Revolutions cannot
be rushed. “But if you wait, if you find
as many as you can—you could have an
army.”
    Suddenly, Maven slaps the table,
causing us all to jump. “But we do have
one.”
    “I have many under my command
here, but not that many,” Farley argues,
looking at Maven like he’s gone mad.
    But he grins, alive with some hidden
fire. “If I can get an army, a legion in
Archeon, what could you do?”
    She just shrugs. “Very little, actually.
The other legions would crush them on
the field.”
    It hits me like a thunderbolt, and I
finally realize what Maven is getting at.
“But they won’t fight on the field,” I
breathe. He turns to me, smiling like a
crazed loon. “You’re talking about a
coup.”
    Farley frowns. “A coo?”
    “A coup, a coup d’état. It’s a history
thing, a before thing,” I explain, trying to
wave off their confusion. “It’s when a
small group quickly overthrows a large
government. Sound familiar?”
    Farley and Kilorn exchange glances,
eyes narrowed. “Go on,” she says.
    “You know the way Archeon’s built,
with the Bridge, the West side, and the
East side.” My fingers race along with
my words, drawing a rough map of the
city in the dust. “Now, the West side has
the palace, command, the treasury, the
courts, the entire government. And if
somehow we can get in there, cut it off,
get to the king, and make him agree to
our terms—it’s all over. You said it
yourself, Maven, you can run the whole
country from Caesar’s Square. All we
have to do is take it.”
    Under the table, Maven pats me on
the knee. He’s buzzing with pride.
Farley’s usual suspicious look is gone,
replaced by real hope. She runs a hand
over her lips, mouthing words to herself
as she eyes the dust-drawn plan.
    “This might just be me,” Kilorn
begins, falling back to his usual snide
tone, “but I’m not exactly sure how you
plan to get enough Reds in there to fight
Silvers. You need ten of us to bring
down one of them. Not to mention
there’s the five thousand Silver soldiers
loyal to your brother”—he glances at
Maven—“all trained to kill, all trying to
hunt us down as we speak.”
    I deflate, falling back against the
seat. “That could be difficult.”
Impossible.
    Maven brushes a hand over my dust
map, wiping away West Archeon with a
few strokes of his fingers. “Legions are
loyal to their generals. And I happen to
know a girl who knows a general very
well.”
    When his eyes meet mine, all his fire
is gone, replaced now by bitter cold. He
smiles tightly.
    “You’re talking about Cal.” The
soldier. The general. The prince. His
father’s son . Again I think of Julian, of
the uncle Cal would kill for his twisted
version of justice. Cal would never
betray his country, not for anything.
    When Maven answers, it’s matter-
of-fact. “We give him a hard choice.”
    I can feel Kilorn’s eyes on my face,
weighing my reaction, and it’s almost
too much pressure to bear. “Cal will
never turn his back on his crown, on
your father.”
    “I know my brother. If it comes
down to it, to saving your life or saving
his crown, we both know what he will
choose,” Maven fires back.
    “He would never choose me.”
    My skin burns under Maven’s gaze,
with the memory of one stolen kiss. It
was him who saved me from
Evangeline. Cal who saved me from
escaping and bringing more pain upon
myself. Cal who saved me from
conscription. I’ve been too busy trying to
save others to notice how much Cal
saves me. How much he loves me.
    Suddenly it’s very hard to breathe.
    Maven shakes his head. “He will
always choose you.”
    Farley scoffs. “You want me to pin
my entire operation, the entire
revolution, on some teenaged love
story? I can’t believe this.”
    Across the table, a strange look
crosses Kilorn’s face. When Farley turns
to him, looking for some kind of support,
she finds none.
    “I can,” he whispers, his eyes never
leaving my face.
         TWENTY-FIVE

As Maven and I are driven across the
Bridge, heading back to the palace after
our long day of handshakes and secret
plans, I wish the dawn would begin
tonight instead of tomorrow morning.
I’m intensely aware of the rumble
around us while we pass through the
city. Everything pulses with energy, from
the transports on the streets to the lights
woven into steel and concrete. It
reminds me of the moment in Grand
Garden long ago, when I watched the
nymphs play in a fountain or the greenys
attend their flowers. In that instant, I
found their world beautiful. I understand
now why they want to keep it, to
maintain their rule over all the rest, but
that doesn’t mean I’ll let them.
    There’s usually a feast to celebrate
the king’s return to his city, but in light
of recent events, Caesar’s Square is
much quieter than it should be. Maven
pretends to lament the lack of spectacle,
if only to fill the silence.
    “The banquet hall is twice the size of
the one at the Hall,” he says as we enter
the great gates. I can see part of Cal’s
legion drilling at the barracks, a
thousand of them marching in time. Their
steps beat like a drum. “We used to
dance until dawn—at least, Cal did.
Girls didn’t ask me to dance much, not
unless Cal made them.”
    “I would ask you to dance,” I
murmur back to him, my eyes still on the
barracks. Will they be ours tomorrow?
    Maven doesn’t answer, shifting in
his seat as we coast to a stop. He will
always choose you.
    “I feel nothing for Cal,” I whisper in
his ear as we clamber out of the
transport.
    He smiles, his hand closing around
mine, and I tell myself it’s not a lie.
    When the doors to the palace open to
us, a wretched scream twists through the
long marbled passages. Maven and I
exchange glances, startled. Our guards
bristle, hands straying to their guns, but
they aren’t enough to stop me from
bolting. Maven keeps up as best he can,
trying to match my pace. The scream
sounds again, accompanied by a dozen
marching feet and the familiar clank of
armor.
    I break into a dead sprint, Maven
right behind me. We burst into a round
chamber, a council hall of polished
marble and dark wood. There’s already
a crowd and I almost collide with Lord
Samos himself, but my feet stop me just
in time. Maven slams into my back,
nearly knocking us over.
    Samos sneers at both of us, his black
eyes cold and hard.
    “My lady, Prince Maven,” he says,
barely inclining his head to either of us.
“Have you come to see the show?”
    The show. There are other lords and
ladies around us, along with the king and
queen, all staring straight ahead. I push
through them, not knowing what I’ll find
on the other side, but I know it won’t be
good. Maven follows, his hand never
leaving my elbow. When we reach the
front of the crowd, I’m glad for his
warm hand, a comfort to keep me quiet
—and to pull me back.
    No less than sixteen soldiers stand in
the center of the chamber, their booted
feet tracking dirt over the great crown
seal. Their armor is the same, scaled
black metal, except for one with a
reddish glint. Cal.
    Evangeline stands with him, her hair
pulled back into a braid. She breathes
heavily, winded, but looks proud of
herself. And where there’s Evangeline,
her brother cannot be far behind.
    Ptolemus appears from the back of
the pack, dragging a screaming body by
her hair. Cal turns away and meets my
eyes the moment I recognize her. I can
see regret there, but he does nothing to
save her.
    Ptolemus tosses Walsh to the
polished floor, her face smashing against
the rock. She barely spares a glance at
me before turning her pained eyes on the
king. I remember the playful, smiling
servant who first introduced me to this
world; that person is gone.
     “The rats crawl in the old tunnels,”
Ptolemus snarls, turning her over with
his foot. She scrambles away from his
touch, surprisingly quick for her many
injuries. “We found this one trailing us
near the river holes.”
     Trailing them? How could she be so
stupid? But Walsh isn’t stupid. No, this
was an order, I realize with growing
horror. She was watching the train
tunnels, making sure the way was clear
for us to get back from Naercey. And
while we made it through safely, she did
not.
     Maven’s grip on my arm tightens,
pulling me into him until his chest lies
flush to my back. He knows I want to run
to her, to save her, to help her. And I
know we can’t do anything at all.
    “We went as far as the radiation
detectors would allow,” Cal adds, trying
his best to ignore Walsh coughing up
blood. “The tunnel system is huge, much
larger than we originally thought. There
must be dozens of miles in the area and
the Scarlet Guard know them better than
any of us.”
    King Tiberias scowls beneath his
beard. He gestures at Walsh, waving her
forward. Cal seizes her by the arm,
pulling her toward the king. A thousand
different tortures fill my head, each one
worse than the last. Fire, metal, water,
even my own lightning, could be used to
make her talk.
     “I will not make the same mistake
again,” the king growls into her face.
“Elara, make her sing. Right now.”
     “With pleasure,” the queen replies,
freeing her hands from her trailing
sleeves.
     This is worse. Walsh will talk,
she’ll implicate us all, she’ll ruin us.
And then they’ll kill her slowly. They’ll
kill us all slowly.
     An Eagrie in the crowd of soldiers,
an eye with the ability of foresight,
suddenly jumps forward. “Stop her!
Hold her arms!”
     But Walsh is faster than his vision.
“For Tristan,” she says, before slamming
a hand to her mouth. She bites down on
something and swallows, knocking her
head back.
    “A healer!” Cal snaps, grabbing her
throat, trying to stop her. But her mouth
foams white and her limbs twitch—she’s
choking. “A healer, now!”
    She seizes violently, twisting out of
his grip with the last of her strength.
When she hits the floor, her eyes are
wide-open, staring but not seeing. Dead.
    For Tristan.
    I can’t even mourn her.

“A suicide pill.”
   Cal’s voice is gentle, like he’s
explaining this to a child. But I suppose I
am a child when it comes to war and
death. “We give them to officers on the
line, and our spies. If they’re captured
—”
    “They won’t talk,” I spit back at him.
    Careful, I warn myself. As much as
his presence makes my skin crawl, I
have to endure it. After all, I let him find
me here on the balcony. I must give him
hope. I must let him think he has a
chance with me. That part was Maven’s
idea, as much as it hurt him to say so. As
for me, it’s hard to walk the narrow line
between a lie and the truth, especially
with Cal. I hate him, I know that, but
something in his eyes and his voice
reminds me that my feelings aren’t so
simple.
    He keeps his distance, standing an
arm’s length away. “It’s a better death
than she would get from us.”
    “Would she be frozen? Or maybe
burned for a change of pace?”
    “No.” He shakes his head. “She
would go to the Bowl of Bones.” He
raises his eyes from the barracks,
looking across the river. On the far side,
nestled among the high-rises, is a
massive oval arena with spikes around
the rim in a violent crown. The Bowl of
Bones. “She’d be executed in a
broadcast, as a message to all the rest.”
    “I thought you didn’t do that
anymore. I haven’t seen one in over a
decade.” I barely remember those
broadcasts from when I was a little girl,
years ago.
     “Exceptions can be made. The arena
fights haven’t stopped the Guard from
taking hold, maybe something else will.”
     “You knew her,” I whisper, trying to
find just one shred of regret in him. “You
sent her to me after we first met.”
     He crosses his arms, like that can
somehow protect him from the memory.
“I knew she came from your village. I
thought that might help you adjust a
little.”
     “I still don’t know why you cared.
You didn’t even know I was different.”
     A moment passes in silence, broken
only by the bark of lieutenants far below,
still drilling even as the sun sets.
     “You were different to me,” he
finally murmurs.
     “I wonder what could have been, if
all this”—I gesture to the palace and the
Square beyond—“wasn’t between us.”
     Let him chew on that.
     He puts a hand on my arm, his
fingers hot through the fabric of my
sleeve.
     “But that can never be, Cal.”
     I force as much longing as I can into
my eyes, relying on the memory of my
family, Maven, Kilorn, all the things
we’re trying to do. Maybe Cal will
mistake my feelings. Give him hope
where none should be. It’s the cruelest
thing I can do, but for the cause, for my
friends, for my life, I will.
     “Mare,” he breathes, dipping his
head toward me.
    I turn away, leaving him on the
balcony to think on my words and,
hopefully, drown in them.
    “I wish things were different,” he
whispers, but I can still hear him.
    The words take me back to my home
and my father when he said the same
thing so long ago. To think that Cal and
my father, a broken Red man, can share
the same thoughts makes me pause. I
can’t help looking back, watching the
sun dip behind his silhouette. He stares
down at the training army before looking
back to me, torn between his duty and
whatever he feels for the little lightning
girl.
     “Julian says you’re like her,” he says
quietly, eyes thoughtful. “Like she used
to be.”
     Coriane. His mother. The thought of
the dead queen, a person I never knew,
somehow makes me sad. She was taken
too soon from those she loved, and she
left a hole they’re trying to make me fill.
     And as much as I hate to admit it, I
can’t blame Cal for feeling caught
between two worlds. After all, so am I.

Before the ball I was anxious, a bundle
of nerves dreading the night to come.
Now I can’t wait for dawn. If we win in
the morning, the sun will set on a new
world. The king will throw down his
crown, passing his power to me, Maven,
and Farley. The shift will be bloodless,
a peaceful transition from one
government to the next. If we fail, the
Bowl of Bones is all I can hope for. But
we will not fail. Cal will not let me die,
and neither will Maven. They are my
shields.
    When I lie down in my bed, I find
myself staring at Julian’s map. It’s an
old thing, practically useless, but still
comforting. It’s proof the world can
change.
    With that thought in my head, I drift
into a restless, light sleep. My brother
visits me in my dreams. He stands by the
window, looking at the city with a
strange sorrow, before turning back to
me. “There are others,” he says. “You
must find them.”
    “I will,” I murmur back to him, my
voice heavy with sleep.
    Then it’s four o’clock in the morning
and I have no more time for dreams.
    The cameras fall like trees before
the ax, each little eye clicking off as I
walk to Maven’s room. I jump at every
shadow, expecting an officer or a
Sentinel to step out into the hall, but no
one does. They protect Cal and the king,
not me, not the second prince. We don’t
matter. But we will.
    Maven opens his door a second after
I jiggle the handle, his face pale in the
darkness. There are circles beneath his
eyes, like he hasn’t slept at all, but he
looks sharp as ever. I expect him to take
my arm, to envelop me in his warmth,
but there’s nothing but cold dripping off
him. He’s afraid, I realize.
    We’re outside in a few agonizing
minutes, walking in the shadows behind
War Command to wait at our place
between the structure and the outer wall.
Our spot is perfect; we’re able to see the
Square and the Bridge, with most of War
Command’s gilded roof blocking us
from the patrols. I don’t need a clock to
know we’re right on time.
    Above us, the night fades, giving
way to dark blue. The dawn is coming.
    At this hour, the city is quieter than I
ever thought possible. Even the patrol
guards are drowsy, slowly moving from
post to post. Excitement trills through
me, making my legs shake. Somehow,
Maven keeps still, barely even blinking.
He stares through the diamondglass
wall, always watching the Bridge. His
focus is staggering.
    “They’re late,” he whispers, never
moving.
    “I’m not.”
    If I didn’t know any better, I’d think
Farley was a shadow, able to shift in
and out of visibility. She seems to melt
out of the semidarkness, pulling herself
up from a drain.
    I offer her my hand, but she pushes
herself to her feet alone. “Where are the
others?”
    “Waiting.” She gestures to the
ground below.
    If I squint, I can just see them,
crowded into the drain system, about to
retake the surface. I want to climb into
the tunnel with them, to stand with
Kilorn and my kind, but my place is
here, next to Maven.
    “Are they armed?” Maven’s lips
barely move. “Are they ready to fight?”
    Farley nods. “Always. But I’m not
calling them out until you’re sure the
Square is ours. I don’t put much faith in
Lady Barrow’s ability to charm.”
    Neither do I, but I can’t say that out
loud. He will always choose you. I’ve
never wanted anything to be right and yet
wrong at the same time.
    “Kilorn wanted you to have this,”
she adds, holding out her hand. In it is a
tiny green stone, the color of his eyes. An
earring. “He said you’d know what it
means.”
    I choke on my words, feeling a great
surge of emotion. Nodding, I take the
earring from her and raise it to the
others. Bree, Tramy, Shade —I know
each stone and what they mean. Kilorn is
a warrior now. And he wants me to
remember him as he was. Laughing,
teasing me, sniffing around like a lost
puppy. I will never forget that.
    The sharp metal stings, drawing
blood. When I pull my hand back from
my ear, I can see the crimson stain on my
fingers. This is who you are.
    I look back to the tunnel, hoping to
see his green eyes, but the darkness
seems to swallow the tunnel whole,
hiding him and all the others.
    “Are you ready for this?” Farley
breathes, looking between us both.
    Maven answers for me, his voice
firm. “We are.”
    But Farley isn’t satisfied. “Mare?”
    “I’m ready.”
    The revolutionary takes a calming
breath before tapping her foot against the
side of the drain. Once, twice, three
times. Together, we turn to the Bridge,
waiting for the world to change.
    There’s no traffic at this hour, not
even the whisper of a transport. The
shops are closed, the plazas empty. With
any luck, the only thing lost tonight will
be concrete and steel. The last section of
the Bridge, the one connecting West
Archeon to the rest of the city, seems
serene.
    And then it explodes in bright
plumes of orange and red, a sun to split
the silver darkness. Heat surges, but not
from the bombs—it’s Maven. The
explosion sparks something in him,
lighting his flame.
    The sound rumbles, almost knocking
me off my feet, and the river below
churns as the end section of the Bridge
collapses. It groans and shudders like a
dying beast, crumbling in on itself as it
detaches from the bank and the rest of
the structure. Concrete pillars and steel
wire crack and snap, splashing into the
water or against the bank. A cloud of
dust and smoke rises, cutting off the rest
of Archeon from view. Before the
Bridge even hits the water, alarms sound
over the Square.
    Above us, patrols run along the wall,
eager to get a good look at the
destruction. They shout to one another,
not knowing what to make of this. Most
can only stare. In the barracks, lights
switch on and soldiers stir, all five
thousand of them jumping out of bed.
Cal’s soldiers. Cal’s legion . And with
any luck, ours.
    I can’t tear my eyes away from the
flame and smoke, but Maven does it for
me. “There he is,” he hisses, pointing to
some dark shapes running from the
palace.
    He has his own guards, but Cal
outstrips them all, sprinting for the
barracks. He’s still in his nightclothes,
but he’s never looked so fearsome. As
soldiers and officers spill out into the
Square, he barks orders, somehow
making himself heard over the growing
crowd. “Guns on the gates! Put nymphs
on the other side, we don’t want the fire
spreading!”
    His men carry out the orders with
speed, jumping at his every word.
Legions obey their generals.
    Behind us, Farley presses herself
back against the wall, inching closer to
her drain. She’ll turn and run at the first
sign of trouble, disappearing to fight
another day. That won’t happen. This
will work.
    Maven moves to go first, to wave
down his brother, but I push him back.
    “I have to do it,” I whisper, feeling a
strange sort of calm come over me. He
will always choose you.
    I’m past the point of no return when I
step into the Square, into full view of the
legion and the patrols and Cal.
Spotlights blaze to life on the tops of the
walls, some pointed at the Bridge, others
down on us. One seems to go right
through me, and I have to raise a hand to
shield my eyes.
    “Cal!” I scream over the deafening
sound of five thousand soldiers.
Somehow, he hears me, his head
snapping in my direction. We lock eyes
through the mass of soldiers falling into
their practiced lines and regiments.
    When he moves toward me, pushing
through the sea, I think I might faint.
Suddenly all I can hear is my heartbeat
pounding in my ears, drowning out the
alarms and the screams. I am afraid. So
very afraid. This is just Cal, I tell
myself. The boy who loves music and
cycles. Not the soldier, not the general,
not the prince. The boy. He will always
choose you.
    “Go back inside, now!” He towers
over me, using the stern, regal voice that
could make a mountain bow. “Mare, it’s
not safe—!”
    With strength I never knew I had, I
grab on to the collar of his shirt and
somehow it keeps him still. “What if that
was the cost?” I toss a glance back to the
broken Bridge, now shrouded in smoke
and ash. “Nothing but a few tons of
concrete. What if I told you that right
here, right now, you could fix
everything. You could save us.”
    By the flicker in his eyes, I can see I
have his attention. “Don’t,” he protests
weakly, one hand grabbing mine.
There’s fear in his eyes, more fear than
I’ve ever seen.
    “You said you believed in us once,
in freedom. In equality. You can make
that real, with one word. There won’t be
a war. No one will die.” He seems
frozen by my words, not daring to
breathe. I can’t tell what he’s thinking,
but I press on. I must make him
understand. “You hold the power right
now. This army is yours, this whole
place is yours to take and—and to free!
March into the palace, make your father
kneel, and do what you know is right.
Please, Cal!”
    I can feel him beneath my hands, his
breath coming in quick pants, and
nothing has ever felt so real or so
important. I know what he’s thinking
about—his kingdom, his duty, his father.
And me, the little lightning girl, asking
him to throw it all away. Something
deep down tells me he will.
    Shaking, I press a kiss to his lips. He
will choose me. His skin feels cold
under mine, like a corpse.
    “Choose me,” I breathe against him.
“Choose a new world. Make a better
world. The soldiers will obey you. Your
father will obey you.” My heart
clenches, and every muscle tightens,
waiting for his answer. The spotlight on
us flickers under my strength, switching
on and off with every heartbeat. “It was
my blood in the cells. I helped the Guard
escape. And soon everyone will know—
and they will kill me. Don’t let them.
Save me.”
    The words stir him, and his grip on
my wrist tightens.
    “It was always you.”
    He will always choose you.
    “Greet the new dawn, Cal. With me.
With us.”
    His eyes shift to Maven now walking
toward us. The brothers lock eyes,
speaking in a way I don’t understand. He
will choose us.
    “It was always you,” he says again,
ragged and ruined this time. His voice
carries the pain of a thousand deaths, a
thousand betrayals. Anyone can betray
anyone, I remember. “The escape, the
shooting, the power outages. It all
started with you.”
    I try to explain, still pulling back.
But he has no intention of letting me go.
    “How many people have you killed
with your dawn? How many children,
how many innocents?” His hand grows
hot, hot enough to burn. “How many
people have you betrayed?”
    My knees buckle, dropping out from
under me, but Cal doesn’t let go. Dimly,
I hear Maven yelling somewhere, the
prince charging in to save his princess.
But I’m not a princess. I’m not the girl
who gets saved. As the fire rises in Cal,
flaming behind his eyes, the lightning
streaks through me, fed by anger. It
shocks between us, throwing me back
from Cal. My mind buzzes, clouded by
sorrow and anger and electricity.
    Behind me, Maven yells. I turn just
in time to see him shouting back at
Farley, gesturing wildly with his hands.
“Run! Run!”
    Cal jumps to his feet faster than me,
shouting something to his soldiers. His
eyes follow Maven’s call, connecting
the dots as only a general can. “The
drains!” he roars, still staring at me.
“They’re in the drains.”
    Farley’s shadow disappears, trying
to escape while gunfire follows her.
Soldiers dart over the Square, ripping
away grates and drains and pipes,
exposing the system beneath. They pour
into the tunnels like a terrible flood. I
want to cover my ears, to block out the
screams and bullets and blood.
    Kilorn. His name flutters weakly in
my thoughts, no more than a whisper. I
can’t think about him long; Cal still
stands over me, his whole body shaking.
But he doesn’t frighten me. I don’t think
anything can scare me now. The worst
has happened already. We have lost.
    “How many?” I scream back at him,
finding the strength to face him. “How
many starved? How many murdered?
How many children taken away to die?
How many, my prince?”
    I thought I knew hate before today. I
was wrong. About myself, about Cal,
about everything. The pain makes my
head spin, but somehow I keep my feet,
somehow I keep myself from falling. He
will never choose me.
    “My brother, Kilorn’s father,
Tristan, Walsh!” What feels like a
hundred names explode from me, rattling
off all the lost ones. They mean nothing
to Cal but everything to me. And I know
there are thousands, millions more. A
million forgotten wrongs.
    Cal doesn’t answer, and I expect to
see the rage I feel reflected in his eyes.
Instead, I see nothing but sadness. He
whispers again, and the words make me
want to fall down and never get up
again.
    “I wish things were different.”
    I expect the sparks, I expect
lightning, but it never comes. When I feel
cold hands on my neck and metal
shackles on my wrists, I know why.
Instructor Arven, the silence, the one
who can make us human, stands behind
me, pushing down all my strength until
I’m nothing but a weeping girl again.
He’s taken it all away, all the strength
and all the power I thought I had. I have
lost. When my knees give out this time,
there’s no one to hold me up. Dimly, I
hear Maven cry out before he too is
pushed to the ground.
    “Brother!” he roars, trying to make
Cal see what he’s doing. “They’ll kill
her! They’ll kill me!” But Cal is no
longer listening to us. He speaks to one
of his captains, and I don’t bother to
listen to the words. I couldn’t even if I
wanted to.
     The ground beneath me seems to
shake with every round of gunfire deep
below. How much blood will stain the
tunnels tonight?
     My head is too heavy, my body too
weak, and I let myself slump against the
tiled ground. It feels cold under my
cheek, soothing and smooth. Maven
pitches forward, his head landing next to
me . I remember a moment like this.
Gisa’s scream and the shattering of
bones echo faintly, a ghost inside my
head.
     “Take them inside, to the king. He
will judge them both.”
    I don’t recognize Cal’s voice
anymore. I’ve turned him into a monster.
I forced his hand. I made him choose. I
was eager, I was stupid. I let myself
hope.
    I am a fool.
    The sun begins to rise behind Cal’s
head, framing him against the dawn. It’s
too bright, too sharp, and too soon; I
have to shut my eyes.
          TWENTY-SIX

I can barely keep up the pace, but the
soldier at my back, holding my shackled
arms, keeps shoving. Another does the
same to Maven, forcing him along with
me. Arven follows us, making sure we
can’t escape. His presence is a dark
weight, dulling my senses. I can still see
the passage around us, empty and far
from the prying eyes of the court, but I
don’t have the strength to care. Cal leads
the pack, his shoulders tense and tight as
he fights the urge to look back.
    The sound of gunfire and screams
and blood in the tunnels rumbles in my
mind. They are dead. We are dead. It is
over.
    I expect us to descend, to march
down to the darkest cell in the world.
Instead, Cal leads us up, to a room with
no windows and no Sentinels. Our
footfalls don’t even echo as we enter—
soundproof. No one can hear us. And
that frightens me more than the guns or
the fire or the pure rage rippling off the
king.
    He stands in the center of the room,
dressed in his own gilded armor with the
crown on his head. His ceremonial
sword hangs at his side again, along
with a pistol he’s probably never used.
All part of the pageant. At least he
looks the part.
    The queen is here as well, waiting
for us in nothing but a thin white gown.
The moment we enter, her eyes meet
mine and she forces her way into my
thoughts like a knife through flesh. I yelp,
trying to clutch my head, but the shackles
hold firm.
    It all flashes before my eyes again,
from the beginning to the end. Will’s
wagon. The Guard. Kilorn. The riots, the
meetings, the secret messages. Maven’s
face swirls in the memories, making him
stand out against the fray, but Elara
pushes him away. She doesn’t want to
see what I remember about him. My
brain screams at the onslaught, jumping
from thought to thought until my whole
life, every kiss and every secret, is laid
bare before her.
     When she stops, I feel dead. I want
to be dead. At least I won’t have long to
wait.
     “Leave us,” Elara says, her voice
cutting and sharp. The soldiers wait,
looking to Cal. When he nods, they take
their leave, departing in a din of clicking
boots. But Arven stays behind, his
influence still pressing down on me.
When the march of boots fades away, the
king allows himself to exhale.
     “Son?” He looks at Cal, and I can
see the slightest quiver in his fingers.
But what he could possibly fear, I do not
know. “I want to hear this from you.”
     “They’ve been part of this for a long
time,” Cal mutters, barely able to say the
words. “Since she came here.”
     “Both?” Tiberias turns away from
Cal, to his forgotten son. He looks
almost sad, his face pulling into a pained
frown. His eyes waver, reluctant to hold
his gaze, but Maven stares right back. He
will not flinch. “You knew about this,
my boy?”
     Maven nods. “I helped plan it.”
     Tiberias stumbles, like his words
are a physical blow. “And the
shooting?”
     “I chose the targets.” Cal squeezes
his eyes shut, like he can block this all
out.
     Maven’s eyes slide past his father, to
Elara, who stands close by. They hold
each other’s gaze, and for a moment, I
think she’s looking into his thoughts.
With a jolt, I realize she won’t. She
can’t let herself look.
    “You told me to find a cause, Father.
And I did. Are you proud of me?”
    But Tiberias rounds on me instead,
snarling like a bear. “You did this! You
poisoned him, you poisoned my boy!”
When tears spring to his eyes, I know the
king’s heart, no matter how small or
cold, has been broken. He loves Maven,
in his own way. But it’s too late for
that. “You’ve taken my son from me!”
    “You have done that yourself,” I say
through gritted teeth. “Maven has his
own heart, and he believes in a different
world as much as I do. If anything, your
son changed me.”
     “I don’t believe you. You have
tricked him somehow.”
     “She does not lie.”
     Hearing Elara agree with me rips my
breath away.
     “Our son has always thirsted for
change.” Her eyes linger on her son. She
s o und s afraid. “He is just a boy,
Tiberias.”
     Save him, I scream out in my head.
She must hear me. She must.
     Next to me, Maven sucks in a breath,
waiting for what could be our doom.
     Tiberias looks at his feet, knowing
the laws better than anyone else, but Cal
is strong enough to meet his brother’s
gaze. I can see him remembering their
life together. Flame and shadow. One
cannot exist without the other.
    After a long moment of hot, stifling
silence, the king puts a hand on Cal’s
shoulder. His head shakes back and
forth, and tears track down his cheeks
into his beard.
    “A boy or not, Maven has killed.
Together with this—this snake”—he
points a shaking finger at me—“he has
committed grave crimes against his own.
Against me, and against you. Against our
throne.”
    “Father—” Cal moves quickly,
putting himself between the king and us.
“He is your son. There must be another
way.”
    Tiberias stills, putting aside the
father to become king again. He wipes
away his tears with a brush of the hand.
“When you wear my crown, you will
understand.”
    The queen’s eyes narrow into blue
slits. Her eyes, they’re the same as
Maven’s.
    “Fortunately, that will never
happen,” she says plainly.
    “What?” Tiberias turns to her but
stops halfway, his body frozen in place.
    I’ve seen this before. In the arena,
long ago, when the whisper beat the
strongarm. Elara even did it to me,
turning me into a puppet. Again, she
holds the strings.
    “Elara, what are you doing?” he
hisses through gritted teeth.
    She replies with words I cannot
hear, speaking into the king’s head. He
doesn’t like her answer at all. “No!” he
yells as she forces him to his knees with
her whispers.
    Cal bristles, his fists exploding into
flame, but Elara holds a hand out,
stopping him in his tracks. She has them
both.
    Tiberias     struggles,    his   teeth
clenched, but can’t move an inch. He can
barely even speak. “Elara. Arven—!”
    But my old instructor doesn’t move.
Instead, he stands quietly, content to
watch. It seems his loyalties lie not with
the king but with the queen.
     She’s saving us. For her son’s life,
she’s going to save us . We bet on Cal
loving me enough to change the world;
we should’ve looked to the queen
instead. I want to laugh, to smile, but
something in Cal’s face keeps my relief
at bay.
     “Julian warned me,” Cal growls,
still trying to break her hold. “I thought
he was lying about you, about my
mother, about what you did to her.”
     On his knees, the king howls. It is a
wretched sound, one I never want to
hear again. “Coriane,” he moans, staring
at the floor. “Julian knew. Sara knew.
You punished her for the truth.”
    Sweat beads on Elara’s forehead.
She cannot hold the king and the prince
for much longer.
    “Elara, you have to get Maven out of
here,” I tell her. “Don’t worry about me,
just keep him safe.”
    “Oh, don’t you fret, little lightning
girl,” she sneers. “I don’t think about you
at all. Though your loyalty to my son is
quite inspiring. Isn’t it, Maven?” She
tosses a glance over her shoulder to her
son, still shackled.
    In response, his arms snap out,
pulling apart the metal shackles with
shocking ease. They melt off his wrists
in globs of hot iron, burning holes in the
floor. When he rises to his feet, I expect
him to defend me, to save me like I’m
trying to save him. Then I realize Arven
still has hold of me, and the familiar feel
of sparks, of electricity, has not returned.
He’s still holding me back, even though
he let Maven go.
     When Cal’s eyes meet mine, I know
he understands much better than I do.
Anyone can betray anyone echoes
louder and louder, until it howls in my
ears like the winds of a hurricane.
     “Maven?” I have to look up to see
his face, and for a second, I don’t
recognize him. He’s still the same boy,
the one who comforted me, kissed me,
kept me strong. My friend. More than
my friend. But something is wrong in
him. Something has changed. “Maven,
help me up.”
     He rolls his shoulders, cracking the
bones to chase away an ache. His
motions are sluggish and strange, and
when he settles back on his feet, hands
on his hips, I feel like I’m seeing him for
the first time. His eyes are so cold.
     “No, I don’t think so.”
     “What?” I hear my voice like it’s
coming from someone else. I sound like
a little girl. I am just a little girl.
     Maven doesn’t answer but holds my
gaze. The boy I know is still there,
hiding, flickering behind his eyes. If I
can just reach him—but Maven moves
faster than me, pushing me away when I
reach out.
     “CAPTAIN TYROS!” Cal roars,
still able to speak. Elara has not taken
that from him yet. But no one comes
running. No one can hear us. “CAPTAIN
TYROS!” he yells again, pleading with
no one. “EVANGELINE! PTOLEMUS,
SOMEONE, HELP!”
     Elara is content to let him shout,
enjoying the sound, but Maven flinches.
“Do we have to listen to this?” he asks.
     “No, I suppose we don’t,” she sighs,
tipping her head. Cal’s body moves with
her thoughts, shifting to face his father.
     Cal panics, his eyes growing wide.
“What are you doing?”
     Beneath him, the king’s face darkens.
“Isn’t it obvious?”
    I don’t understand at all. I don’t
belong here. Julian was right. This is a
game I don’t understand, a game I
don’t know how to play . I wish Julian
were here now, to explain, to help, to
save me. But no one is coming.
    “Maven, please,” I plead, trying to
make him look at me. But he turns his
back, focusing on his mother and his
betrayed blood. He is his mother’s son.
    She didn’t care that he was in my
memories. She didn’t care that he was
part of all this. She didn’t even look
surprised. The answer is frighteningly
si mpl e. Because she already knew.
Because he is her son. Because this was
her plan all along. The thought stings
like knives running along skin, but the
pain only makes it more real.
    “You used me.”
    Finally, Maven condescends to look
back at me. “Catching on, are you?”
    “You chose the targets. The colonel,
Reynald, Belicos, even Ptolemus—they
weren’t the Guard’s enemies, they were
yours.” I want to tear him apart, lightning
or not. I want to make him hurt.
    I am finally learning my lesson.
Anyone can betray anyone.
    “And this, this was just another plot.
You pushed me into this, even though it
was impossible, even though you knew
Cal would never betray his father! You
made me believe it. You made all of us
believe it.”
    “It’s not my fault you were stupid
enough to play along,” he replies. “Now
the Guard is finished.”
    It feels like a kick in the teeth. “They
were your friends. They trusted you.”
    “They were a threat to my kingdom,
and they were stupid,” he fires back. He
stoops, bending over me with his twisted
smile. “Were.”
    Elara laughs at his cruel joke. “It
was too easy to slip you into their midst.
One sentimental servant was all it took.
How such fools became a danger, I’ll
never know.”
    “You made me believe,” I whisper
again, remembering every lie he ever
told me. “I thought you wanted to help
us.” It comes out a whimper. For a split
second, his pale features soften. But it
doesn’t last.
    “Foolish girl,” Elara says. “Your
idiocy was almost our ruin. Using your
own guard in the escape, causing all the
outages—do you really think I was so
stupid as to miss your tracks?”
    Numb, I shake my head. “You let me
do it. You knew about it all.”
    “Of course I knew. How else do you
think you came so far? I had to cover
your tracks, I had to protect you from
anyone with enough sense to see the
signs,” she snarls, growling like a beast.
“You do not know the lengths I went to
keep you from harm.” She flushes with
pleasure, enjoying every second of this.
“But you are Red, and like all the others,
you were doomed to fail.”
     It breaks against me, memories
falling into place. I should’ve known,
deep down, not to trust Maven. He was
too perfect, too brave, too kind. He
turned his back on his own to join the
Guard. He pushed me at Cal. He gave
me exactly what I wanted, and it made
me blind.
     Wanting to scream, wanting to weep,
I let my eyes trail to Elara. “You told
him exactly what to say,” I whisper. She
doesn’t have to nod, but I know I’m
right. “You know who I am in here, and
you      knew”—my        head      aches,
remembering how she played inside my
mind—“you knew exactly how to win
me over.”
    Nothing hurts more deeply than the
hollow look on Maven’s face.
    “Was anything true?”
    When he shakes his head, I know that
is also a lie.
    “Even Thomas?”
    The boy at the war front, the boy
who died fighting someone else’s war.
His name was Thomas and I saw him
die.
    The name punches through his mask,
cracking the facade of cool indifference,
but isn’t enough. He shrugs off the name
and the pain it causes him. “Another
dead boy. He makes no difference.”
    “He makes all the difference,” I
whisper to myself.
    “I think it’s time to say your good-
byes, Maven,” Elara cuts in, putting a
white hand on her son’s shoulder. I’ve
struck too close to his weak spot, and
she won’t let me push further.
    “I have none,” he whispers, turning
back to his father. His blue eyes waver,
looking at the crown, the sword, the
armor, anywhere but his father’s face.
“You never looked at me. You never
saw me. Not when you had him.” He
jerks his head toward Cal.
    “You know that’s not true, Maven.
You are my son. Nothing will change
that. Not even her,” Tiberias says,
casting a glance at Elara. “Not even
what she’s about to do.”
    “Dearest, I’m not doing anything,”
she chirps back. “But your beloved
boy”—she slaps Cal across the face
—“the perfect heir”—she slaps him
again, harder this time—“Coriane’s
son.” Another slap draws blood,
splitting his lip. “I cannot speak for
him.”
    Thick silverblood drips down Cal’s
chin. Maven’s eyes linger on the blood,
and the slightest frown pulls at his
features.
    “We had a son too, Tibe,” Elara
whispers, her voice ragged with rage as
she turns back to the king. “No matter
how you felt about me, you were
supposed to love him.”
    “ I did!” he shouts, straining against
her mental hold. “I do.”
    I know what it’s like to be cast
aside, to stand in another’s shadow. But
this kind of anger, this murderous,
destructive, terrible scene is beyond my
comprehension. Maven loves his father,
his brother—how can he let her do this?
How can he want this?
    But he stands still, watching, and I
can’t find the words to make him move.
    Nothing prepares me for what comes
next, for what Elara forces her puppets
to do. Cal’s hand shakes, reaching
forward, pushed along by her will. He
tries to resist, struggling with every
ounce of strength he has, but it’s no use.
This is a battle he does not know how to
fight. When his hand closes around the
gilded sword, pulling it from the sheath
at his father’s waist, the last piece of the
puzzle slips into place. Tears course
down his face, steaming against burning-
hot skin.
    “It’s not you,” Tiberias says, his
eyes on Cal’s wretched face. He doesn’t
bother pleading for his life. “I know it’s
not you, son. This is not your fault.”
    No one deserves this. No one. In my
head, I reach for the lightning, and it
comes. I blast away Elara and Maven,
saving the prince and the king. But even
that fantasy is tainted. Farley is dead.
Kilorn is dead. The revolution is over.
Even in my imaginings, I cannot fix that.
    The sword rises in the air, shaking in
Cal’s trembling fingers. The blade is
ceremonial at best, but the edge gleams,
sharp as a razor. The steel reddens,
warming under Cal’s fiery touch, and
bits of the gilded hilt melt between his
fingers. Gold and silver and iron,
dripping from his hands like tears.
    Maven watches the blade closely,
carefully, because he is too afraid to
watch his father in his last moments. I
thought you were brave. I was so
wrong.
    “Please,” is all Cal can say, forcing
the words out. “Please.”
    There is no regret in Elara’s eyes
and no remorse. This moment has been
coming for a long time. When the sword
flashes, arcing through air and flesh and
bone, she doesn’t blink.
     The king’s corpse lands with a thud,
his head rolling to a stop a few feet
away. Silverblood splashes across the
floor in a mirrored puddle, lapping at
Cal’s toes. He drops the melting sword,
letting it clang against stone, before
falling to his knees, his head in his
hands. The crown clatters across the
floor, circling through the blood, until it
stops to rest at Maven’s feet, sharp
points bright with liquid silver.
     When Elara screams, wailing and
thrashing over the king’s body, I almost
laugh aloud at the absurdity of it all. Has
she changed her mind? Has she lost it
entirely? Then I hear the click of
cameras switching on, coming back to
life. They poke out of the walls, pointing
straight down at the king’s body and
what looks like a queen mourning her
fallen husband. Maven yells at her side,
one hand on his mother’s shoulder.
     “You killed him! You killed the
king! You killed our father!” he screams
in Cal’s face. Only a hint of a smirk
remains, and somehow Cal resists the
urge to rip his brother’s head off. He’s
in shock, not understanding, not wanting
to understand. But for once, I certainly
do.
     The truth doesn’t matter. It only
matters what the people believe. Julian
tried to teach me that lesson before, and
now I understand it. They will believe
this little scene, this pretty play of
actors and lies. And no army, no
country will follow a man who
murdered his father for the crown.
    “Run, Cal!” I scream, trying to snap
him back to life. “You have to run!”
    Arven has let me go, and the electric
pulse returns, surging through my veins
like fire through ice. It’s nothing at all to
shock the metal, burning it with sparks
until the shackles fall off my wrists. I
know this feeling. I know the instinct
rising in me now. Run. Run. Run.
    I grab Cal’s shoulders, trying to pull
him up, but the big oaf doesn’t budge. I
give him a little shock, just enough to
catch his attention, before screaming
again. “RUN!”
    It’s enough, and he struggles to his
feet, almost slipping in the pool of
blood.
    I expect Elara to fight me, to make
me kill myself or Cal, but she continues
screaming, acting for the cameras.
Maven stands over her, arms ablaze,
ready to protect his mother. He doesn’t
even try to stop us.
    “There’s nowhere for you to go!” he
shouts, but I’m already running, dragging
Cal along behind me. “You are
murderers, traitors, and you will face
justice!”
    His voice, a voice I used to know so
well, seems to chase us through the
doors and down the hall. The voices in
my head scream with him.
    Stupid girl. Foolish girl. Look what
your hope has done.
    And then it’s Cal dragging me along,
forcing me to keep up. Hot tears of anger
and rage and sorrow drown my eyes,
until I can’t see anything but my hand in
his. Where he leads, I don’t know. I can
only follow.
    Feet pound behind us, the familiar
sound of boots. Officers, Sentinels,
soldiers, they’re all chasing, coming for
us.
    The floor beneath us steadily
changes from the polished wood of back
hallways to swirling marble—the
banquet hall. Long tables set with fine
china block the way, but Cal throws
them aside with a blast of fire. The
smoke triggers an alarm system, and
water rains down on us, fighting the
blaze. It turns to steam on Cal’s skin,
shrouding him in a raging white cloud.
He looks like a ghost, haunted by a life
suddenly torn away, and I don’t know
how to comfort him.
    The world slows for me as the far
end of the banquet hall darkens with gray
uniforms and black guns. There’s
nowhere for me to run anymore. I must
fight.
    Lightning blazes in my skin, begging
to be loosed.
    “No.” Cal’s voice is hollow, broken.
He lowers his own hands, letting the
flames disappear. “We can’t win this.”
    He’s right.
    They close in from the many doors
and arches, and even the windows
crowd with uniforms. Hundreds of
Silvers, armed to the teeth, ready to kill.
We are trapped.
    Cal searches the faces, his eyes
lingering on the soldiers. His own men.
By the way they stare back, glaring at
him, I know they’ve already seen the
horror Elara created. Their loyalties are
broken, just like their general. One of
them, a captain, trembles at the sight of
Cal. To my surprise, he keeps his gun at
his side as he steps forward.
    “Submit to arrest,” he says, his hands
shaking.
    Cal locks eyes with his old friend
and nods. “We submit to arrest, Captain
Tyros.”
    Run, every inch of me screams. But
for once, I cannot. Next to me, Cal looks
just as affected, his eyes reflecting a
pain I can’t even imagine. His wounds
are soul-deep.
    He has learned his lesson as well.
       TWENTY-SEVEN

Maven has betrayed me. No, he was
never on my side at all.
    My eyes adjust, seeing bars through
the dim light. The ceiling is low and
heavy, like the underground air. I’ve
never been here before, but I know it all
the same.
    “The Bowl of Bones,” I whisper
aloud, expecting no one to hear me.
    Instead, someone laughs.
    The darkness continues to lift,
revealing more of the cell. A lumpy
shape sits against the bars next to me,
shifting with every peal of laughter.
    “I was four years old the first time I
came here, and Maven was barely two.
He hid behind his mother’s skirts, afraid
of the darkness and the empty cells.” Cal
chuckles, every word sharp as a knife. “I
guess he’s not afraid of the dark
anymore.”
    “No, he’s not.”
    I’m the shadow of the flame. I
believed Maven when he said those
words, when he told me how much he
hated this world. Now I know it was all
a trick, a masterful trick. Every word,
every touch, every look was a lie. And I
thought I was the liar.
    Instinctively I reach out with my
abilities, feeling for any pulse of
electricity, something to give me a spark
of energy. But there’s nothing. Nothing
but a blank, flat absence, a hollow
sensation that makes me shiver.
    “Is Arven nearby?” I wonder,
remembering how he shut off my
abilities, forcing me to watch as Maven
and his mother destroyed their family. “I
can’t feel a thing.”
    “It’s the cells,” Cal says dully. His
hands draw shapes in the dirty floor
—flames. “Made of Silent Stone. Don’t
ask me to explain it, because I can’t, and
I don’t feel like trying.”
    He looks up, eyes glaring through the
darkness at the unending line of cells. I
should be afraid, but I have nothing left
to fear. The worst has already happened.
     “Before the matches, back when we
still had to execute our own, the Bowl of
Bones hosted everything nightmares are
made of. The Great Greco, who used to
tear men in half and eat their livers. The
Poison Bride. She was an animos of
House Viper and sent snakes into my
great-great-uncle’s bed on their wedding
night. They say his blood turned to
venom, he was bitten so many times.”
Cal lists them off, the criminals of his
world. They sound likes stories invented
to make children behave. “Now, us. The
Traitor Prince, they’ll call me. ‘He
killed his father for the crown. He just
couldn’t wait.’”
     I can’t help but add to the tale. “‘The
bitch made him do it,’ they’ll gossip to
each other.” I can see it in my head,
shouted on every street corner, from
every video screen. “They’ll blame me,
the little lightning girl. I filled your
thoughts with poison, I corrupted you. I
made you do it.”
    “You almost did,” he murmurs back.
“I almost chose you this morning.”
    Was it just this morning? That
cannot be true. I push myself up against
the bars, leaning just inches away from
Cal.
    “They’re going to kill us.”
    Cal nods, laughing again. I’ve heard
him laugh before, at me every time I
tried to dance, but this sound is not the
same. His warmth is gone, leaving
nothing behind.
    “The king will see to it. We will be
executed.”
    Execution. I’m not surprised, not in
the least.
    “How will they do it?” I can barely
remember the last execution. Only
images remain: silverblood on sand, the
roar of a crowd. And I remember the
gallows at home, rope swinging in a
harsh wind.
    Cal’s shoulders tense. “There are
many ways. Together, one at a time, with
swords or guns or abilities or all three.”
He heaves a sigh, already resigned to his
fate. “They’ll make it hurt. It will not be
quick.”
    “Maybe I’ll bleed all over the place.
That’ll give the rest of the world
something to think about.” The bleak
thought makes me smile. When I die, I’ll
be planting my own red flag, splashing it
across the sands of the massive arena.
“He won’t be able to hide me then.
Everyone will know what I really am.”
    “You think that will change
anything?”
    It must. Farley has the list, Farley
will find the others . . . but Farley is
dead. I can only hope she passed the
message on, to someone still alive. The
others are still out there, and they must
be found. They must carry on, because I
no longer can.
    “I think it won’t,” Cal continues, his
voice filling the silence. “I think he’ll
use it as an excuse. There will be more
conscriptions, more laws, more labor
camps. His mother will invent another
marvelous lie, and the world will keep
on turning, the same as before.”
    No. Never the same again.
    “He’ll look for more like me,” I
realize aloud. I’ve already fallen, I’ve
already lost, I’m already dead. And this
is the last nail in the coffin. My head
drops into my hands, feeling my sharp,
clever fingers curl into my hair.
    Cal shifts against the bars, his weight
sending vibrations through the metal.
“What?”
    “There are others. Julian figured it
out. He told me how to find them, and
—” My voice breaks, not wanting to
continue. “And I told him.” I feel like
screaming. “He used me so perfectly.”
    Through the bars, Cal turns to look at
me. Even though his abilities are far
away, suppressed by these wretched
walls, an inferno rages in his eyes.
“How does it feel?” he growls, almost
nose to nose with me. “How does it feel
to be used, Mare Barrow?”
    Once, I would’ve given anything to
hear him say my real name, but now it
stings like a burn. I thought I was using
them both, Maven and Cal. How stupid
I was.
    “I’m sorry,” I force out. I despise
those words, but they’re all I can give.
“I’m not Maven, Cal. I didn’t do this to
hurt you. I never wanted to hurt you.”
And softer, barely audible, “It wasn’t all
a lie.”
    His head thunks back against the
bars, so loud it must hurt, but Cal
doesn’t seem to notice. Like me, he’s
lost the ability to feel pain or fear. Too
much has happened.
    “Do you think he’ll kill my parents?”
My sister, my brothers . For once, I’m
happy Shade is dead and out of Maven’s
reach.
    I feel surprising warmth bleed
against me, settling into my shivering
bones. Cal has moved again, leaning
against the bars right behind me. His
heat is gentle, natural—not driven by
anger or ability. It’s human. I can feel
him breathing, his heart beating. It
hammers like a drum as he finds the
strength to lie to me. “I think he has more
important things to think about.”
    I know he can feel me crying, my
shoulders shaking with every sob, but he
doesn’t say anything. There are no
words for this. But he stays right there,
my last bit of warmth in a world turning
to dust. I weep for them all. Farley,
Tristan, Walsh, Will. Shade, Bree,
Tramy, Gisa, Mom, and Dad. Fighters,
all of them. And Kilorn. I couldn’t save
him, no matter how hard I tried. I can’t
even save myself.
     At least I have my earrings. The
little specks, sharp in my skin, will stay
with me until the end. I die with them,
and they with me.
     We stay like that for what must be
hours, though nothing changes to mark
the passing time. I even doze off once,
before a familiar voice makes me jerk
awake.
     “In another life, I might be jealous.”
     Maven’s words send shivers down
my spine and not in a good way.
     Cal jumps to his feet quicker than I
thought possible and throws himself at
the bars, making the metal sing. But the
bars hold firm, and Maven, cunning,
disgusting, awful Maven, is just out of
reach. To my delight, he still flinches
away.
    “Save your strength, brother,” he
says, teeth clicking together with every
word. “You will need it soon.”
    Though he wears no crown, Maven
already stands with the air of a terrible
king. His dress uniform is crowded with
new medals. They were his father’s
once; I’m surprised they aren’t still
covered in blood. He looks even paler
than before, though the dark circles
under his eyes are gone. Murder helps
him sleep.
    “Will it be you in the arena?” Cal
snarls through the bars, his hands tight on
the iron. “Will you do it yourself? Do
you even have the nerve?”
    I can’t find the strength to stand, as
much as I want to rush the bars, to tear
away metal with my bare hands until the
only thing I feel is Maven’s throat. I can
only watch.
    He laughs dully at his brother’s
words. “We both know I could never
beat you with ability,” he says, throwing
back Cal’s own advice from so long
ago. “So I beat you with my head, dear
brother.”
    Once, he told me Cal hated to lose.
Now I realize the one playing to win
was always Maven. Every breath, every
word was in service to this bloody
victory.
    Cal growls low under his breath.
“Mavey,” he says, but the nickname
holds no love anymore. “How could you
do this to Father? To me? To her?”
    “A murdered king, a traitorous
prince. So much blood,” he sneers,
dancing at the edge of Cal’s reach.
“They weep in the streets for our father.
Or at least, they pretend to,” he adds
with a disinterested shrug. “The foolish
wolves wait for me to stumble, and the
smart ones know I will not. House
Samos, House Iral, they’ve been
sharpening their claws for years, waiting
for a weak king, a compassionate king.
You know they drooled at the sight of
you? Think about it, Cal. Decades from
now, Father would die slowly,
peacefully, and you would ascend.
Married to Evangeline, a daughter of
steel and knives, with her brother at your
side. You wouldn’t survive the
coronation night. She would do what
Mother did and supplant you with her
own child.”
    “Don’t tell me you did this to protect
a dynasty,” Cal scoffs, shaking his head.
“You did this for yourself.”
    Again, Maven shrugs. He grins to
himself with a pointed, cruel smile. “Are
you really so surprised? Poor Mavey,
the second prince. The shadow of his
brother’s flame. A weak thing, a little
thing, doomed to stand to the side and
kneel.”
    He shifts, prowling from Cal’s cell
to stand in front of mine. I can only stare
at him from the ground, not trusting
myself to move. He even smells cold.
    “Betrothed to a girl with eyes for
another, for the brother, the prince no
one could ever ignore.” His words take
on a feral edge, heavy with a wild anger.
But there is truth in them, a harsh truth
I’ve tried so hard to forget. It makes my
skin crawl. “You took everything that
should     have      been mine,        Cal.
Everything.”
    Suddenly I’m standing, shaking
violently, but still standing. He’s lied to
us for so long, but I cannot let him lie
now.
    “I was never yours, and you were
never mine, Maven,” I snarl. “And not
because of him, either. I thought you
were perfect, I thought you were strong
and brave and good. I thought you were
better than him.”
    Better than Cal. Those are words
Maven thought no one would ever say.
He flinches, and for a second, I can see
the boy I used to know. A boy that
doesn’t exist.
    He reaches out a hand, grabbing at
me between the bars. When his fingers
close over the bare skin of my wrist, I
feel nothing but repulsion. He holds me
tight, like I’m some kind of lifeline.
Something has snapped in him, revealing
a desperate child, a pathetic, hopeless
thing trying to hold on to his favorite toy.
    “I can save you.”
    The words make my skin scrawl.
    “Your father loved you, Maven. You
didn’t see it, but he did.”
    “A lie.”
    “He loved you, and you killed him!”
The words come faster, spilling like
blood from a vein. “Your brother loved
you, and you made him a murderer. I—I
loved you. I trusted you. I needed you.
And now I’m going to die for it.”
    “I am king. You will live if I want
you to. I will make it so.”
    “You mean if you lie? One day your
lies will strangle you, King Maven. My
only regret is I won’t be alive to see it.”
And then it’s my turn to grab him. I pull
with all my strength, making him stumble
against the bars. My knuckles connect
with his cheek, and he yelps away like a
kicked dog. “I will never make the
mistake of loving you ever again.”
    To my dismay, he recovers quickly
and smoothes his hair. “So you choose
him?”
    That’s all this ever was. Jealousy.
Rivalry. All so shadow could defeat the
flame.
    I have to throw my head back and
laugh, feeling the eyes of the brothers on
me. “Cal betrayed me, and I betrayed
him. And you betrayed us both, in a
thousand different ways.” The words are
heavy as stone but right. So right. “I
choose no one.”
     For once, I feel like I control fire
and Maven has been burned by it. He
stumbles back from my cell, somehow
defeated by the little girl without her
lightning, the prisoner in chains, the
human before a god.
     “What will you tell them when I
bleed?” I hiss after him. “The truth?”
     He laughs deep in his chest. The
little boy disappears, replaced by the
king killer again. “The truth is what I
make it. I could set this world on fire
and call it rain.”
     And some will believe. The fools.
But others will not. Red and Silver,
high and low, some will see the truth.
    His voice becomes a snarl, his face
a shadow of a beast. “Anyone who
knows that we hid you, anyone with
even a hint of suspicion, will be dealt
with.”
    My mind buzzes, flying to everyone
who knew something about me was
strange. Maven beats me there, seeming
to enjoy listing off the many deaths.
“Lady Blonos had to go, of course.
Decapitation deals nicely with skin
healers.”
    She was an old crow, an annoyance
—and she didn’t deserve this.
    “The maids were easier. Pretty girls,
sisters from Oldshire. Mother did them
in herself.”
    I never even learned their names.
    My knees hit the ground heavily, but
I barely feel it. “They didn’t know
anything.” But my begging is no use now.
    “Lucas will go as well,” he says,
smirking with teeth bright in the
darkness. “You’ll get to see that for
yourself.”
    I feel like retching. “You told me he
was safe, with his family—!”
    He laughs long and hard. “When are
you going to realize that every word out
of my mouth was a lie?”
    “We forced him, Julian and I. He did
nothing wrong.” Begging feels so awful,
but it’s all I can think to do. “He’s of
House Samos. You can’t kill one of
them.”
     “Mare, haven’t you been paying
attention? I can do anything,” he growls.
“It’s a pity we couldn’t get Julian back
here in time. I would’ve liked to make
him watch you die.”
     I do my best to choke back a sob,
pressing a hand to my mouth. Next to me,
Cal growls deep in his throat, thinking of
his uncle. “You found him?”
     “Of course we did. We captured
Julian and Sara both.” Maven laughs.
“I’ll settle for killing Skonos first,
finishing the job my mother began. You
know the story there now, don’t you,
Cal? You know what my mother did,
whispering her way into Coriane’s head,
making her brain crawl.” He draws
closer, eyes wild and frightening. “Sara
knew. And your father, even you, refused
to believe her. You let my mother win.
And you’ve done it again.”
    Cal doesn’t respond, resting his head
against the bars. Satisfied he’s destroyed
his brother, Maven turns on me, pacing
just beyond my cell.
    “I’ll make the others scream for you,
Mare, every last one. Not just your
parents. Not just your siblings. But every
single one like you. I’m going to find
them, and they will die with you in their
thoughts, knowing this is the fate you
have brought them. I am the king and you
could’ve been my Red queen. Now you
are nothing.”
    I don’t bother to brush away the tears
coursing down my cheeks. It’s no use
anymore. Maven enjoys the sight of me
broken and sucks on his teeth like he
wants to taste me.
    “Good-bye, Maven.” I wish there
was more I could say, but there are no
words for his evil. He knows what he is,
and, worst of all, he likes it.
    He dips his head, almost bowing to
the pair of us. Cal doesn’t bother to look
and grips the bars instead, wearing at the
metal like it’s Maven’s neck.
    “Good-bye, Mare.” The smirk is
gone, and, to my surprise, his eyes look
wet. He hesitates, not wanting to go. It’s
like he’s suddenly understood what he’s
done and what’s about to happen to all
of us. “I told you to hide your heart once.
You should have listened.”
    How dare he.
    I have three older brothers, so when
I spit at Maven, my aim is perfect, hitting
him square in the eye.
    He turns quickly, almost running
from the pair of us. Cal stares after him
for a long time, unable to speak. I can
only sit down, letting my rage seep away
again. When Cal settles back against me,
there are no more words left to say.
    Many things led to this day, for all of
us. A forgotten son, a vengeful mother, a
brother with a long shadow, a strange
mutation. Together, they’ve written a
tragedy.
In the stories, the old fairy tales, a hero
comes. But all my heroes are gone or
dead. No one is coming for me.
    It must be the next morning when the
Sentinels arrive, led by Arven himself.
With the suffocating walls, his presence
makes it difficult to stand, but they force
me up.
    “Sentinel Provos, Sentinel Viper.”
Cal nods at the Sentinels when they open
his cell. They pull him roughly to his
feet. Even now, facing death, Cal is
calm.
    He greets every guard we pass,
addressing them by name. They stare
back, angry or bewildered or both. A
king killer should not be so kind. The
soldiers are even worse. He wants to
stop to say good-bye to them properly,
but his own men grow hard and cold at
the sight of him. And I think that hurts
him almost as much as everything else.
After a while, he goes quiet, losing the
last bit of will he has left. As we climb
out of the darkness, the noise of a crowd
grows steadily nearer. Faint at first, but
then a dull roar right above us. The
arena is full, and they’re ready for a
show.
     This started when I fell into the
Spiral Garden, a body made of sparks,
and now it ends at the Bowl of Bones.
I’ll leave as a corpse.
     Arena attendants, all dull-eyed
Silvers, descend on us like a flock of
pigeons. They pull me behind a curtain,
preparing me for what’s to come with
brisk movements and hard hands. I
barely feel them, pushing and pulling,
shoving me into a cheaper version of a
training suit. This is meant to be an
insult, making me wear something so
simple to die in, but I prefer the scratch
of fabric to the whisper of silk. I think
dimly of my maids. They painted me
every day; they knew I had something to
hide. And they died for it. No one paints
me now or even bothers to brush away
the dirt from a night spent in a cell.
More pageantry. Once, I wore silk and
jewels and pretty smiles, but that doesn’t
fit Maven’s lie. A Red girl in rags is
easier for them to understand, and to kill.
    When they pull me back out again, I
can see they’ve done the same for Cal.
There will be no medals, no armor for
him. But he has his flame-maker bracelet
again. The fire burns still, smoldering in
the broken soldier. He has resigned
himself to die, but not before taking
someone with him.
    We hold each other’s gaze, simply
because there’s nowhere else to look.
    “What are we walking into?” Cal
finally says, tearing his eyes away from
mine to face Arven.
    The old man, white as paper, looks
back on his former students without a
flicker of remorse. What did they
promise him, for his help? But I can
already see. The badge over his heart,
the crown made of jet, diamond, and
ruby, was Cal’s once. I don’t doubt he
was given much more.
    “You were a prince and a general. In
his wisdom, the merciful king has
decided you are to at least die with
glory.” He smiles as he speaks, showing
sharp little teeth. Rat’s teeth . “A good
death, the kind a traitor doesn’t deserve.
    “As for the Red girl, the trickster.”
He turns his fearsome gaze on me,
focusing harder. The stifling weight of
his power threatens to drag me down.
“She will have no weapons at all and
die like the devil she is.”
    I open my mouth to protest, but
Arven leers over me, his breath reeking
of poison. “King’s orders.”
    No weapons. I feel like screaming.
No lightning. Arven won’t let me go,
even to die. Maven’s words echo
sharply in my head. Now you are
nothing. I’ll die as nothing. They don’t
need to hide my blood if they can claim
my powers were faked somehow.
    Down in the cells, I was almost
eager to step out onto the sand, to send
my sparks into the sky and my blood into
the earth. Now I shake and shiver,
wanting to run away, but my wretched
pride, the only thing I have left, won’t
even allow that.
    Cal takes my hand. He quivers like I
do, afraid to die. At least he’ll have a
chance to fight.
    “I’ll protect you as long as I can,” he
whispers. I almost don’t hear him over
the tramp of feet and the pathetic beat of
my heart.
    “I don’t deserve it,” I mutter back,
but I squeeze his hand in thanks all the
same. I betrayed him, I ruined his life,
and this is how he repays me.
    The next room is the last. It’s a
sloping passage, leading up a gentle
incline to a steel gate. Sunlight dances
through, bleeding down to us along with
all the noise of a full arena. The walls
distort the sounds, transforming cheers
and shouts into the howls of a nightmare.
I suppose that’s not far from the truth.
     As we enter, I see we’re not the only
ones waiting to die.
     “Lucas!”
     A guard holds his arm, but Lucas
still manages to glance over his
shoulder. His face is full of bruises and
he looks paler than before, like he hasn’t
seen the sun in days. It’s probably true.
     “Mare.” Just the way he says my
name makes me cringe. He’s another one
I’ve betrayed, using him like I used Cal,
Julian, the colonel, like I tried to use
Maven. “I was wondering when I’d see
you again.”
     “I’m so sorry.” I go to my grave
apologizing, and it still won’t be
enough. “They told me you were with
your family, that you were safe, or else
—”
    “Or else what?” he asks slowly.
“I’m nothing to you. Just something to be
used and cast aside.”
    The accusation cuts like a knife. “I’m
sorry, but it had to be done.”
    “The queen made me remember.”
Made. There’s pain in his voice. “Don’t
apologize, because you don’t mean it.”
    I want to embrace him, to show this
was not what I wanted. “I do; I swear,
Lucas.”
    “His Majesty, Maven of House
Calore and House Merandus, the King of
Norta, Flame of the North.” The cry
rings out in the arena, echoing down to
us through the gate. The accompanying
cheers make me cringe, and Lucas
flinches. His end is near.
    “Would you do it again?” The words
sting sharply. “Would you risk me for
your terrorist friends again?” I would. I
don’t say it out loud, but Lucas sees my
answer in my eyes. “I kept your secret.”
    It’s worse than any insult he could
throw at me. The knowledge that he
protected me, even though I didn’t
deserve it, gnaws at my core.
    “But now I know you’re not
different, not anymore,” he continues,
almost spitting. “You’re the same as all
the rest. Heartless, selfish, cold—just
like us. They taught you well.”
    Then he turns, facing the gate again.
He wants no more words from me. I
want to go to him, to try and explain, but
a guard holds me back. There’s nothing
more for me to do but stand tall and wait
for our doom.
    “My citizens.” Maven’s voice filters
through the gate with the daylight. He
sounds like his father, like Cal, but
there’s something sharper in his voice.
He’s only seventeen and already a
monster. “My people, my children.”
    Cal scoffs next to me. But out in the
arena, a dead, haunting silence settles.
He has them in the palm of his hand.
    “Some would call this a cruelty,”
Maven continues. I don’t doubt he
memorized a stirring speech, probably
written by his witch of a mother. “My
father’s body is barely cold, his blood
still stains the floor, and I have been
forced to take his place, to begin my
reign in such a violent shadow. We have
not executed our own for ten years, and
it pains me to begin that awful tradition
again. But for my father, for my crown,
for you, I must. I am young, but I am not
weak. Such crimes, such evil will be
punished.”
     Up above us, high in the arena, jeers
ring out, cheering for death.
     “Lucas of House Samos, for crimes
against the crown, for collusion with the
terrorist organization known as the
Scarlet Guard, I declare you guilty. I
sentence you to die. Submit to
execution.”
    And then Lucas is walking up the
incline, to his own death. He doesn’t
spare a glance for me. Not that I deserve
one. He’s dying, not just because of what
we made him do but for what I am. Like
the others, he knew there was something
strange about me. And like the others, he
will die. When he disappears through the
far gate, I have to turn away and stare at
the wall. The gunshots are hard to
ignore. The crowd roars, pleased by the
violent display.
    Lucas was only the beginning, the
opening act. We are the show.
    “Walk,” Arven says, prodding us on.
He follows as we begin the slow climb.
    I cannot let go of Cal’s hand, in case
I stumble. Every muscle in him tenses,
ready for the fight of his life. I reach out
for my lightning in one last attempt, but
nothing comes. There’s not even a
tremor left in me. Arven—and Maven—
have taken it away.
    Through the gate, I watch Lucas’s
body be dragged away, leaving a streak
of silverblood across the sand. A wave
of sickness passes over me, and I have
to bite my lip.
    With a great groan, the steel gate
shudders and rises up. The sunlight
blinds me for a second, freezing me to
the spot, but Cal pulls me forward into
the arena.
    White sand, fine as powder, slides
beneath my feet. As my eyes adjust, I
almost forget to breathe. The arena is
enormous, a wide gray mouth of steel
and stonework, filled with thousands of
angry faces. They stare down on us in
deafening silence, pouring their hate into
my skin. I can’t see any Reds at all, but I
don’t expect to. This is what the Silvers
call entertainment, another play for them
to laugh at, and they won’t share it.
    Video screens dot the arena,
reflecting my own face back at me. Of
course they must record this, to
broadcast it across the nation. To show
the world another Red brought so low.
The sight gives me pause; I look like
myself again. Ratty, tangled hair, simple
clothing, dirt falling off me in little
clouds. My skin blushes with the blood
I’ve tried so long to hide. If death
weren’t waiting for me, I would
probably smile.
    To my surprise, the screens flicker,
switching from the image of Cal and me
to something grainy—security footage,
from all the cameras, all the electric
eyes. With a shaky breath, I realize
exactly how deep Maven’s plan really
went.
    The screens play it all back, every
stolen moment. Sneaking out of the Hall
with Cal, dancing together, our
whispered conversations, our kiss. And
then the king’s murder in its full, terrible
glory. Taken together as one, it’s not
hard to believe Maven’s story. All of it
connects together, the tale of the Red
devil who seduced a prince, who made
him kill a king. The crowd gasps and
murmurs, eating up the perfect lie. Even
my own parents would have a hard time
denying this.
    “Mare Molly Barrow.”
    Maven’s voice booms out behind
me, and we spin to see the royal fool
staring down at us. His own box of seats
drips with black-and-red flags, filled to
the brim with lords and ladies I
recognize. They all wear black,
forgetting their house colors in honor of
a murdered king. Sonya, Elane, and all
the other High House children stare
down on me with disgust. Lord Samos
stands on Maven’s left, with the queen
on his right. Elara hides behind a
mourning veil, probably to mask her
wicked smile. I expect Evangeline to be
hovering nearby, content to marry the
next king. After all, she only wanted the
crown. But she’s nowhere to be seen.
Maven himself looks like a dark ghost,
his pale skin sharp against the black
gleam of dress armor. He even wears the
sword they killed the king with, and his
father’s crown nestles against his hair,
gleaming in the sun.
     “Once we believed you to be the lost
Mareena Titanos, another murdered
citizen of my crown. With the help of
your Red brethren, you deceived us with
technological      tricks    and      ruses,
infiltrating     my       own      family.”
Technological tricks . The screens show
me back in the Spiral Garden, rippling
with electricity. In the footage, it seems
unnatural. “We gave you an education,
status, power, strength—and even our
love. For that, you repaid us with
treachery, turning my own brother
against his blood with your deceit.
     “We know now that you are an
operative of the defeated Scarlet Guard
and are directly responsible for the loss
of countless lives.” The images flicker
to the night of the Sun Shooting, to the
ballroom full of blood and death.
Farley’s flag, the fluttering red rag and
the torn sun, stands out against the chaos.
    “Together with my brother, Prince
Tiberias the Seventh, of House Calore
and House Jacos, you are accused of
many violent and deplorable offenses
against the crown, including deception,
treason, terrorism, and murder.” Your
hands are no cleaner than mine,
Maven. “You killed the king, my father,
bewitching his own son to do the deed.
You are a Red devil”—he sweeps his
eyes to Cal, now almost igniting in anger
—“and you are a weak man. A traitor to
your crown, your blood, and your
colors.” The death of the king plays
again, cementing Maven’s twisted
words.
    “I pronounce you both guilty of your
crimes. Submit to execution.” A great
jeer goes up over the arena. It sounds
like pigs screaming, howling for blood.
    The video screens flip back to Cal
and me, expecting us to weep or plead
for our lives. Neither of us moves an
inch. They will not get that from us.
    Maven stares over the side of his
box, leering, waiting for one of us to
snap.
    Instead, Cal salutes, two fingers to
his brow. It’s better than punching
Maven in the face, and he draws back,
disappointed. He looks away from us, to
the far side of the arena. When I turn, I
expect to see the gunmen who killed
Lucas, but I’m greeted by a very
different sight.
    I don’t know where they came from
or when but five figures appear in the
dust.
    “That’s not too bad,” I murmur,
squeezing Cal’s hand. He’s a warrior, a
soldier. Five on one might even be fair
for him.
    But Cal furrows his brow, his
attention on our executioners. They come
into sharper focus and fear rolls through
me. I know their names and abilities,
some much better than others. All of
them ripple with strength, in armor and
uniforms meant for war.
    A strongarm Rhambos to tear me
apart, the Haven son who will
disappear and choke me like a
shadowed ghost, and Lord Osanos
himself to drown Cal’s fire. Arven as
well, I remind myself. He stands at the
gate, his eyes never leaving my body.
     Don’t forget the other two. The
magnetrons.
     It’s almost poetic, really. In matching
armor,       with     matching       scowls,
Evangeline and Ptolemus stare us down,
their fists bristling with long, cruel
knives.
     Somewhere in my head, a clock
ticks, counting down. Not much time
left.
     Above us, Maven’s voice croaks
out.
     “Let them die.”
       TWENTY-EIGHT

The shield explodes to life above us, a
giant purple dome of veined glass like
the one in the Spiral Garden. Not to
protect us—but to protect the crowd.
Sparks of lightning pulse through the
monstrous ceiling, teasing me. Without
Arven, the lightning would be mine and I
could fight. I could show this world who
I am. But that is not to be.
    Cal shifts, putting out his arm. The
air ripples around him, distorted by the
waves of heat rolling off his body. He
angles himself toward the others,
protecting me.
    “Stay behind me as long as you can,”
he says, letting his own heat push me
back. The flame maker sparks, and fire
crackles between his fingers, growing up
his arms. Something in his shirt keeps it
from burning, and the fabric doesn’t
smoke away. “When they break through
the wall, you’ll have to run.
Evangeline’s      weakest,      but   the
strongarm’s slow. You can outrun him.
They’ll try to drag this out, to make it a
show.” Then softly, “They won’t let us
die quickly.”
    “What about you? Osanos will—”
    “Let me worry about Osanos.”
    The executioners move steadily, like
wolves stalking prey. They spread out
across the middle of the arena, each one
ready to advance. Somewhere, metal
scrapes and a piece of the arena floor
slides away, revealing a sloshing pool
of water at Lord Osanos’s feet. He
smiles, drawing the water up to him in a
menacing shield. I remember his
daughter Tirana dueling Maven in
Training. She destroyed him.
    All around, the crowd jeers.
Ptolemus roars with them, letting his
famed temper take over. He smacks at
his armor, ringing it like a bell. At his
side, Evangeline spins her knives,
sliding them over her knuckles with a
grin.
    “This won’t be like before, Red,”
she crows. “No tricks can save you
now.”
    Tricks. Evangeline knows my
abilities better than most; she knows they
weren’t tricks. But she believes. She
ignores the truth for something easier
to understand.
    The Haven son, Stralian, grins to
himself. Like his sister Elane, he is a
shadow. When he flickers out of being,
disappearing in the bright sunlight, Cal
moves faster than I thought possible,
swinging out his arm in a wide arc like
he’s throwing a haymaker punch.
    A roar of flame follows his arm,
burning up the sand, separating us from
them. But the fire is surprisingly weak.
The sand will barely burn.
    I can’t stop myself from glancing
back at Maven, wanting to scream at
him, only to find he’s still staring at me
with that insufferable crooked smirk.
Not only has he taken away my abilities,
but he’s limiting Cal as much as he can.
    “Bastard,” I curse under my breath.
“The sand—”
    “I know,” Cal snaps, igniting more
bits of the ground with a wave of his
hand.
    Directly across from us, the line of
flame separates for a second, followed
closely by a bitter scream of pain. On
the other side of the dying fire, Stralian
fades back into sight, batting flames from
his arms. Osanos douses him with a lazy
gesture, putting out the fire with a wave
of water. Then he turns his startling blue
eyes on us, on Cal’s wall, and in a single
motion, draws water across the weak
fire like a lapping wave. The water
hisses and spits, flash-boiling into thick
clouds of steam. Trapped by the glass
dome, the steam settles through the
arena, shrouding us in a ghostly white
fog. It swirls and spins, enveloping us in
a white world where every shadow
could be our doom.
    “Be ready!” Cal shouts, a hand
reaching for me, but Ptolemus charges
out of the steam in a roar of flesh and
steel.
    He hits Cal around the middle,
knocking him to the ground, but Cal
doesn’t stay down long enough for
Ptolemus to stab out with his knives. The
blades dig into the ground seconds after
Cal leaps, his hands on Ptolemus’s
armor. The steel melts beneath his touch,
drawing a scream from the berserker. I
can only run as Cal tries to cook a man
in his own armor.
    “I don’t want to kill you, Ptolemus,”
Cal says through the screams of pain.
Every knife, every shard of metal
Ptolemus raises to stab Cal melts away
from his intense heat. “I don’t want to do
this.”
    Three sparkling blades cut through
the steam, barely flashing blurs. Too fast
to melt in midair. They hit Cal’s back,
stinging through his shirt before melting
away. He yells in pain, losing focus for
a second as three spots of silverblood
stain his shirt. The knives were too
small to cut deep, but they weaken him
still. Ptolemus takes his chance and in
the blink of an eye, his knives meld into
a single monstrous sword. He slashes,
meaning to slice Cal in two, but he
dodges in time, earning a scratch across
the belly.
     Still alive. But not for long.
     Evangeline appears through the
steam, knives swirling around in a
glinting display. Cal dips and dodges her
blades, throwing blasts of fire to knock
her off course. He duels them both,
hitting an insane rhythm that allows him
to fight off two magnetrons, despite their
strength and power. But blood stains his
clothes and new wounds appear with
every passing second. Ptolemus’s
weapon shifts, from a sword to an ax to
a razor-thin metal whip, while
Evangeline’s jagged stars keep biting.
They’re wearing him down. Slowly but
surely.
     My lightning, I think mournfully,
looking back to Arven at our gate. He’s
still there, a black presence to haunt me.
A gun hangs at his waist; I can’t even try
to fight him. I can’t do anything.
     When a massive chunk of concrete
sails out of the steam, heading directly
for me, I barely have time to dodge. It
shatters against the sand where I stood
seconds ago, but before I have time to
think, another comes hunting, howling
through the air. The sky is raining
concrete down on me. Like Cal, I find
my rhythm, scurrying through the sand
like a rat, until something stops me short.
    A hand. An invisible hand.
    Stralian’s grip closes on my throat,
choking me. I can hear him breathing in
my ear, though I can’t see him. “Red and
dead,” he growls, tightening his hand.
    My arm swings out, digging an
elbow into what I suppose are his ribs,
but he holds firm. I can’t breathe and
black spots dot my vision, threatening to
spread, but I keep fighting. Through the
haze, I can see the Rhambos strongarm
prowling, his eyes locked on me. He’ll
pull me apart.
     Cal still fights the Samos siblings,
doing his best not to get stabbed. I can’t
scream for him even if I wanted to, but
somehow he manages to throw a fireball
my way. Rhambos has to jump back,
stumbling on his massive feet, buying me
a few more seconds. Gasping, choking, I
dig my nails back, reaching for a head I
cannot see. It’s a miracle when I feel his
face and then his eyes. With a gasping
scream, I dig in, thumbs to his eye
sockets, blinding him. Stralian roars,
letting go of me. He falls to his knees,
flickering back into being. Silverblood
trails from his eyes like mirrored tears.
     “You were supposed to be mine!” a
voice screams, and I turn to see
Evangeline standing over Cal, her blade
raised. Ptolemus has wrestled Cal to the
ground, the two of them rolling through
the sand with Evangeline haunting over
them, her knives peppering the ground
around him. “Mine!”
     It doesn’t occur to me that running
headfirst into a magnetron might not be a
good idea until I collide into her. We
fall together, my face scraping along her
armor. It smarts and stings and bleeds,
dripping red for all to see. Though I
can’t see the screens, I know every one
broadcasts the image of my blood
through the country.
    Evangeline shrieks, lashing out with
her dancing blades. Behind us, Cal fights
to his feet, blasting Ptolemus away with
a blaze of fire. The magnetron collides
with his sister, knocking her away
seconds before her knives slice through
me.
    “Duck!” Cal shouts, throwing me to
the sand as another slab of concrete flies
over us, shattering against the far wall.
    We can’t keep this up . “I’ve got an
idea.”
    Cal spits at the sand, and I think I see
a few teeth mixed in with the blood.
“Good, because I ran out of them five
minutes ago.”
    Another block sails by, forcing us to
jump apart, and just in time. Evangeline
and Ptolemus return with a vengeance,
locking Cal into a chaotic dance of
knives and shrapnel. Their powers shake
the arena around us, calling up more
metal from down deep, forcing Cal to
watch his footing along with everything
else. Shards of pipes and wires poke up
through the sand, creating a deadly
obstacle course of metal.
    One of them stabs Stralian where he
kneels, still screaming over his eyes.
The pipe goes straight through him,
popping out through his mouth to silence
his cries for good. Through the
wreckage, I hear the arena crowd
scream and gasp at the sight. For all
their violent ways, all their power,
they’re still cowards.
    My feet pound through the sand as I
circle Rhambos, daring him to attack me.
Cal’s right, I’m faster, and though
Rhambos is a monster of muscle, he trips
over his own feet trying to chase me. He
rips the jagged pipes from the ground,
throwing them at me like spears, but
they’re easy to dodge and he roars in
frustration. I’m Red, I’m nothing, and I
can still make you fall.
    The sound of rushing water brings
me back, making me remember the fifth
executioner. The nymph.
    I turn just in time to see Lord Osanos
part the steam like a curtain, clearing the
arena floor. And ten yards away, still
dueling hard, is Cal. Smoke and fire
explode from him, beating back the
magnetrons. But as Osanos advances, the
water trailing in a swirling cloak, Cal’s
flames recede. Here is the true
executioner. Here is the end of the show.
    “Cal!” I scream, but there’s nothing I
can do for him. Nothing.
    Another pipe sails past my cheek, so
close I feel the cold sting, so close it
makes me spin and fall. The gate is only
yards away, with Arven still standing in
its mouth, half-shrouded by darkness.
    Cal sends a blast of fire at Osanos,
but he smothers it quickly. Steam
screams from the clash of water and fire,
but water is winning.
    Rhambos advances, pushing me back
toward the gate. Cornered. I let him
corner me. Rocks and metal break
against the wall behind me, enough to
shatter my bones. Lightning, my head
screams. LIGHTNING.
    But there’s nothing. Just the dark
smother of dead senses, suffocating me.
    All around us, the crowd jumps to
their feet, sensing the end. I can hear
Maven above me, cheering with all the
rest.
    “Finish them off!” he yells. It still
surprises me to hear such malice in his
voice. But when I look up, his eyes
meeting mine through the shield and
steam, there’s nothing but anger and rage
and evil.
    Rhambos takes aim, a long, jagged
pipe in hand. Death has come.
    Over the din, I hear a roar of
triumph: Ptolemus. He and Evangeline
step back from a swirling orb of water,
and the cloudy figure deep within. Cal.
The water boils, and his body strains,
trying to break free, but it’s no use. He’s
going to drown.
    Behind me, almost in my ear, Arven
laughs to himself. “Who has the
advantage?” he sneers to himself,
repeating his words from Training.
    My muscles ache and twitch, begging
for it to be over. I just want to lie down,
to admit defeat, to die. They called me a
liar, a trickster, and they were right.
    I have one more trick left up my
sleeve.
    Rhambos takes aim, setting his feet
in the sand, and I know what I must do.
He hurls his spear with such strength it
seems to burn the air. I drop, throwing
myself to the sand.
    A sickening squelch tells me my plan
has worked and the scream of electricity
surging back to life tells me I might win.
    Behind me, Arven collapses, a pipe
speared through his middle.
    “I have the advantage,” I tell his
corpse.
    When I get back to my feet, thunder
and lightning and sparks and shocks and
everything I can possibly control spits
from my body. The crowd screams
aloud, Maven above them all.
    “Kill her! KILL HER!” he roars,
pointing down at me through the dome.
“SHOOT HER!”
    Bullets dig into the dome, sparking
and splintering against the electric
shield, but it holds firm. It was supposed
to protect them, but it is electric, it is
lightning, it is mine, and the shield
protects me now.
    The crowd gasps, not believing their
eyes. Red blood drips from my wounds,
and lightning trembles in my skin,
declaring what I am for everyone.
Overhead, the video screens go dark.
But I’ve already been seen. They can’t
stop what’s already happened.
    Rhambos takes a quivering step
back, his breath catching in his throat. I
don’t give him a chance to take another.
    Silver and Red, and stronger than
both.
    My lightning streaks through him,
boiling his blood, frying his nerves, until
he collapses in a twitching pile of meat.
    Osanos drops next as my sparks run
over him. The liquid orb splashes to the
ground, and Cal collapses to the sand,
spitting up water with hacking coughs.
    Despite the jagged metal spikes
punching up through the sand, trying to
run me through, I break into a sprint,
dodging and vaulting over every
obstacle. They trained me for this. It’s
their own fault. They helped make their
own doom.
    Evangeline waves a hand, sending a
steel beam flying at my head. I slide
beneath it, knees skimming across the
ground, before coming up beside her,
daggered bolts of lightning in my hands.
    She calls up a sword from the
swirling metal, forging a blade. My
lightning breaks against it, shocking
through the iron, but still she duels. The
metal shifts and splits all around us,
trying to fight me. Even her spiders
return to tear me down, but they aren’t
enough. She isn’t enough.
    Another blast of lightning knocks her
blades away and sends her sprawling,
trying to escape my wrath. She won’t.
    “Not a trick,” she breathes, taken off
guard. Her eyes fly between my hands as
she backs away, bits of metal floating
between us in a hasty shield. “Not a lie.”
    I can taste red blood in my mouth,
sharp and metallic and strangely
wonderful. I spit it out for all to see.
Overhead, the blue sky darkens through
the shielded dome. Black clouds gather,
heavy and full with rain. The storm is
coming.
    “You said you’d kill me if I ever got
in your way.” It feels so good to throw
her words back in her face. “Here’s your
chance.”
    Her chest rises and falls, heaving
with each breath. She’s tired. She’s
wounded. And the steel behind her eyes
is almost gone, giving way to fear.
    She lunges, and I move to block her
attack, but it never comes. Instead, she
runs. She runs from me, sprinting at the
closest gate she can find. I pound after
her, running to hunt her down, but Cal’s
roar of frustration stops me in my tracks.
    Osanos is on his feet again, dueling
with renewed strength, while Ptolemus
dances around them, looking for his
openi ng. Cal is no good against
nymphs, not with his fire. I remember
how easily bested Maven was in his
own training so long ago.
    My hand closes around the nymph’s
wrist, shocking him through his skin,
forcing him to turn his anger on me. The
water feels like a hammer, knocking me
backward into the sand. It crashes and
crashes, making it impossible to breathe.
For the first time since I entered the
arena, the cold hand of fear clenches
around my heart. Now that we have a
chance of winning, of living, I’m so
afraid to lose. My lungs scream for air
and I can’t help but open my mouth,
letting the water choke me. It stings like
fire, like death.
     The tiniest spark runs through me,
and it’s enough, shocking through the
water and up into Osanos. He yelps,
jumping back long enough to let me
scramble free, slipping through the wet
sand. Air sears my lungs as I gasp for
breath, but there’s no time to enjoy it.
Osanos is on me again; this time his
hands are around my neck, holding me
under the swirling foot of water.
    But I’m ready for him. The fool is
stupid enough to touch me, to put his skin
against mine. When I let the lightning go,
shocking through flesh and water, he
screams like a boiling teakettle and flops
backward. As the water falls away,
draining into the sand, I know he’s truly
dead.
    When I rise, soaking wet, shaking
with adrenaline, fear, strength, my eyes
fly to Cal. He’s slashed and bruised,
bleeding all over, but his arms rage with
bright red fire, and Ptolemus cowers at
his feet. He raises his hands in defeat,
begging for mercy.
    “Kill him, Cal,” I snarl, wanting to
see him bleed. Above us, the lightning
shield pulses again, surging with my
anger. If only it was Evangeline. If only I
could do it myself. “He tried to kill us.
Kill him.”
    Cal doesn’t move, breathing hard
through his teeth. He looks so torn, eager
for vengeance, consumed by the thrill of
battle, but also steadily fading back to
the calm, thoughtful man he used to be.
The man he can’t be anymore.
    But a man’s nature is not so easily
changed. He steps back, flames fading
away.
    “I won’t.”
    The silence presses down, a
wonderful change from the screaming,
jeering crowd who wanted us dead
moments ago. But when I look up, I
realize they aren’t staring. They aren’t
seeing Cal’s mercy or my ability. They
aren’t even there at all. The great arena
has emptied, leaving no witnesses to our
victory. The king sent them away, to hide
the truth of what we have done so he can
supplant it with his own lies.
    From his box, Maven begins to clap.
    “Well done,” he shouts, moving to
the edge of the arena. He peers at us
through the shield, his mother close at
his shoulder.
    The sound hurts more than any knife,
making me cringe. It echoes over the
empty structure, until marching feet,
boots on stone and sand, drown him out.
    Security, Sentinels, soldiers, all of
them pour onto the sand from every gate.
There are hundreds, thousands, too many
to fight. Too many to run from. We won
the battle, but we lost the war.
    Ptolemus        scrambles       away,
disappearing into the crowd of soldiers.
Now we’re alone in a steadily closing
circle, with nothing and no one left.
    It’s not fair. We won. We showed
them. It’s not fair. I want to scream, to
shock and rage and fight, but the bullets
will get me first. Hot tears of anger well
in my eyes, but I will not cry. Not in
these last moments.
    “I’m sorry I did this to you,” I
whisper to Cal. No matter how I feel
about his beliefs, he’s the one truly
losing here. I knew the risks, but he was
just a pawn, torn between so many
playing an invisible game.
    He clenches his jaw, twisting and
turning as he looks for some way out of
this. But there isn’t one. I don’t expect
him to forgive me, and I don’t deserve it
either. But his hand closes over mine,
holding on to the last person on his side.
    Slowly, he starts to hum. I recognize
the tune as the sad song, the one we
kissed to in a room full of moonlight.
    Thunder rumbles in the clouds,
threatening to burst. Raindrops pitter on
the dome above us. It shocks and sizzles
the rain, but the water keeps coming in a
steady downpour. Even the sky weeps
for our loss.
    At the edge of his box, Maven stares
down at us. The sparking shield distorts
his face, making him look like the
monster he truly is. Water drips down
his nose, but he doesn’t notice. His
mother whispers something in his ear
and he jolts, brought back to reality.
    “Good-bye, little lightning girl.”
    When he raises his hand, I think he
might be shaking.
    Like the little girl I am, I squeeze my
eyes shut, expecting to feel the blinding
pain of a hundred bullets ripping me
apart. My thoughts turn inward, to days
long past. To Kilorn, my parents, my
brothers, my sister. Will I see them all
soon? My heart tells me yes. They’re
waiting for me, somewhere, somehow.
And like I did that day in the Spiral
Garden, when I thought I was falling to
my death, I feel cold acceptance. I will
die. I feel life leaving, and I let go.
    The storm overhead explodes with a
deafening clap of thunder, so strong it
shakes the air. The ground rumbles
beneath my feet and, even behind closed
eyelids, I see the blinding flash of light.
Purple and white and strong, the
strongest thing I’ve ever felt. Weakly, I
wonder what will happen if it hits me.
Will I die or will I survive? Will it
forge me like a sword, into something
terrible and sharp and new?
     I never find out.
     Cal seizes me by the shoulders,
throwing us both out of the way as a
giant bolt of lightning streaks down out
of the sky. It shatters through the shield,
sending purple shards down on us like
falling snow. It sizzles against my skin in
a delightful sensation, an invigorating
pulse of power to bring me back to life.
     All around us, the gunmen cower,
ducking or running away, trying to
escape the sparking storm. Cal tries to
drag me, but I’m barely aware of him.
Instead, my senses buzz with the storm,
feeling it churning above me. It’s mine.
     Another bolt strikes down, pounding
into the sand, and the Security officers
scatter, running for the gates. But the
Sentinels and the soldiers are not so
easily frightened, and they come to their
senses quickly. Even though Cal pulls
me back, trying to save us both, they
pursue—and there is no escape.
    As good as the storm feels, it drains
me, leeching my energy away.
Controlling a lightning storm is just too
much. My knees buckle, and my heart
beats like a drum, so fast I think it might
burst. One more bolt, one more . We
might have a chance.
    When my feet stumble backward,
heels jutting out over the empty chasm
that once held Osanos’s water weapon, I
know it’s over. There’s nowhere else to
run.
    Cal holds me tight, pulling me back
from the edge in case I might fall.
There’s nothing but blackness down
there, and the echo of churning water
deep down. Nothing but pipes and
plumbing and black nothing. And ahead
of us, the practiced, brutal ranks of
soldiers. They take aim mechanically,
raising their guns in unison.
    The shield is broken, the storm is
dying, and we have lost. Maven can
smell my defeat and grins from his box,
his lips pulled into a terrifying smile.
Even from such a distance, I can see the
glinting points of his crown. Rainwater
runs into his eyes, but he doesn’t blink.
He doesn’t want to miss my death.
     The guns rise, and this time they
won’t wait for Maven’s order.
     The shooting thunders like my storm,
ringing out across the empty arena. But I
feel nothing. When the first line of
gunmen falls, their chests peppered with
bullet holes, I don’t understand.
     I blink down at my feet, only to see a
line of strange guns poking out over the
edge of the chasm. Each barrel smokes
and jumps, still shooting, mowing down
all the soldiers in front of us.
     Before I can understand, someone
grabs the back of my shirt and pulls me
down to fall through the black air. We
land in water far below, but the arms
never let go.
   The water takes me, down into
darkness.
             EPILOGUE

The black void of sleep ebbs away,
giving way to life again. My body rocks
with motion, and I can sense an engine
somewhere. Metal shrieks against metal,
scraping at high speed in a noise I
vaguely recognize. The Undertrain.
    The seat beneath my cheek feels
oddly soft, but also tense. Not leather or
cloth or concrete, I realize, but warm
flesh. It shifts beneath me, adjusting as I
move, and my eyes open. What I see is
enough to make me think I’m still
dreaming.
    Cal sits across the train, his posture
stiff and tense, fists clenched in his lap.
He stares straight ahead, to the person
cradling me, and in his eyes is the fire I
know so well. The train fascinates him,
and his gaze flickers now and then,
glancing at the lights and the windows
and the wires. He’s itching to examine it,
but the person at his side keeps him from
moving at all.
     Farley.
     The revolutionary, all scars and
tension, stands over him. Somehow she
survived the slaughter under the Square.
I want to smile, to call out to her, but
weakness bleeds through me, keeping me
still. I remember the storm, the battle of
the arena, and all the horrors that came
before. Maven. His name makes my
heart clench, twisting in anguish and
shame. Anyone can betray anyone.
     Her gun hangs across her chest,
ready to fire on Cal. There are more like
her, tensely guarding him. They are
broken, wounded, and so few, but they
still look menacing. Their eyes never
stray from the fallen prince, watching
him as a mouse would a cat. And then I
see his wrists are bound, shackled in
iron that he could easily melt away. But
he doesn’t. He just sits there quietly,
waiting for something.
     When he feels my gaze, his eyes snap
to mine. Life sparks in him again.
     “Mare,” he murmurs, and some of
the hot anger breaks. Some.
    My head spins when I try to sit up,
but a comforting hand pushes me back
down again. “Lie still,” a voice says, a
voice I vaguely recognize.
    “Kilorn,” I mumble.
    “I’m here.”
    To my confusion, the old fisher boy
pushes his way through the Guardsmen
behind Farley. He has scars of his own
now, with dirty bandages on his arm, but
he stands tall. And he is alive. Just the
sight of him sends a flood of relief
through me.
    But if Kilorn is standing there, with
the rest of the Guard, then . . .
    My neck turns sharply, moving to
look up at the person above me. “Who
—?”
     The face is familiar, a face I know
so well. If I were not already lying
down, I would certainly fall. The shock
is too much for me to bear.
     “Am I dead? Are we dead?”
     He’s come to take me away. I died
in the arena. This was a hallucination,
a dream, a wish, a last thought before
dying. We are all dead.
     But my brother shakes his head
slowly, staring at me with familiar
honey-colored eyes. Shade was always
the handsome one, and death has not
changed that.
     “You’re not dead, Mare,” he says,
his voice as smooth as I remember.
“Neither am I.”
     “How?” is all I can manage, sitting
back to examine my brother fully. He
looks the same as I remember, without
the usual scars of a soldier. Even his
brown hair is growing out again, shaking
off the military cut. I run my fingers
through it, to convince myself he’s real.
     But he is not the same. Just like you
are not the same.
     “The mutation,” I say, letting my
hand graze his arm. “They killed you for
it.”
     His eyes seem to dance. “They
tried.”
     I don’t blink, time doesn’t pass, but
he’s moved at a speed beyond my sight,
beyond even that of a swift. Now he sits
across from me, next to the still-shackled
Cal. It’s like he’s shifting through space,
jumping from one spot to another in no
time at all.
    “And failed,” he finishes from his
new seat. His grin is wide now,
pleasantly amused by my openmouthed
stare. “They said they killed me, they
told the captains I was dead and my
body burned.” Another split second and
he’s sitting next to me again, appearing
out of thin air. Teleporting. “But they
weren’t fast enough. No one is.”
    I try to nod, I try to understand his
ability, his simple existence, but I can’t
comprehend much more than the circle
of his arms around me. Shade. Alive and
like me.
    “What about the others? Mom, Dad
—” But Shade stills me with a smile.
    “They’re safe and waiting,” he says.
His voice breaks a little, overcome with
emotion. “We’ll see them soon.”
    My heart swells at the thought. But
like all my happiness, all my joy and all
my hope, it doesn’t last long. My eyes
fall on the Guard bristling with
weapons, on Kilorn’s scars, on Farley’s
tense face and Cal’s bound hands. Cal,
who has suffered so much, escaping one
prison for another.
    “Let him go.” I owe him my life,
more than my life. Surely I can give him
some comfort here. But no one budges at
my words, not even Cal.
     To my surprise, he answers before
Farley. “They won’t. And they shouldn’t.
In fact, you should probably blindfold
me, if you really want to be thorough.”
     Even though he’s been cast down,
thrown out of his own life, Cal can’t
change who he is. The soldier is in him
still. “Cal, shut up. You’re not a danger
to anyone.”
     With a scoff, Cal tips his head,
gesturing at the train of armed rebels.
“They seem to think otherwise.”
     “Not to us, I mean,” I add, shrinking
back against my seat. “He saved me up
there, even after what I did. And after
what Maven did to you—”
     “Don’t say his name.” His growl is
frightful, putting a chill in me, and I
don’t miss Farley’s hand tightening
around her gun.
    Her words slide out between
clenched teeth. “No matter what he did
for you, the prince is not on our side.
And I won’t risk what’s left of us for
your little romance.”
    Romance. We flinch at the word.
There is no such thing between us
anymore. Not after what we did to each
other, and what was done to us. No
matter how much we might want there
to be.
    “We’re going to keep fighting, Mare,
but Silvers have betrayed us before. We
won’t trust them again.” Kilorn’s words
are softer, a balm to try to help me
understand. But his eyes spark at Cal.
Obviously he remembers the torture
down in the cells and the terrible sight of
frozen blood. “He might be a valuable
prisoner.”
    They don’t know Cal like I do. They
don’t know he could destroy them all,
that he could escape in a heartbeat if he
really wanted. So why does he stay?
When he meets my eyes, somehow he
answers my question without speaking.
The hurt I see radiating from him is
enough to break my heart. He is tired.
He is broken. And he doesn’t want to
fight anymore.
    Part of me doesn’t either. Part of me
wishes I could submit to chains, to
captivity and silence. But I have lived
that life already, in the mud, in the
shadows, in a cell, in a silk dress. I will
never submit again. I will never stop
fighting.
    Neither will Kilorn. Neither will
Farley. We will never stop.
    “The others like us . . .” My voice
shakes, but I have never felt so strong.
“The others like me and Shade.”
    Farley nods and pats a hand to her
pocket. “I still have the list. I know the
names.”
    “And so does Maven,” I reply
smoothly. Cal twitches at the name.
“He’ll use the bloodbase to trace them,
and hunt them down.”
    Even though the train sways and
shakes, twisting over dark tracks, I force
myself to my feet. Shade tries to steady
me, but I brush his hand away. I must
stand on my own.
    “He can’t find them before we do.” I
raise my chin, feeling the pulse of the
train. It electrifies me. “He can’t.”
    When Kilorn steps toward me, his
face set and determined, his bruises and
scars and bandages seem to fade. I think
I see the dawn in his eyes.
    “He won’t.”
    A strange warmth falls over me, a
warmth like the sun though we are deep
underground. It’s as familiar to me as my
own lightning, reaching out to envelop
me in an embrace we can’t have. Even
though they call Cal my enemy, even
though they fear him, I let his warmth fall
on my skin, and I let his eyes burn into
mine.
    Our shared memories flash before
me, parading every second of our time
together. But now our friendship is gone,
replaced by the one thing we still have
in common.
    Our hatred for Maven.
    I don’t need to be a whisper to know
we share a thought.
    I will kill him.
   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I’ll do this chronologically, to try to
include everyone, because I owe thanks
to so many people. First and most of all,
my ridiculously supportive parents who
encouraged me to do anything and
everything I wanted. They remain my
greatest teachers, and I’m grateful for
every gift, especially letting me watch
Jurassic Park at 3 years old. To my
brother, Andrew, who joined in on every
game and every joke, and made my
fantasy worlds so much bigger and
brighter. My grandparents—George and
Barbara, Mary and Frank—who gave
and continue to give more love and
memory than I can understand. Too many
aunts, uncles, and cousins to name, not to
mention friends and neighbors who
tolerated me running through their lives
and backyards. Natalie, Lauren, Teressa,
Kim, Katrina, and Sam, who stuck with
me through the rough teen years and
questionable clothing choices. Of
course, every English and social studies
teacher I ever had, who continuously
told me to stop writing novels for
essays. And I have to thank the ones who
influenced me beyond reason, even
though they don’t know me. Steven
Spielberg, George Lucas, Peter Jackson,
J.R.R. Tolkien, J.K. Rowling, C.S.
Lewis. I grew up in a small town, but
because of these people, my world never
seemed that way.
    The     University    of   Southern
California and their incomparable
School of Cinematic Arts somehow let
me slip in, and completely changed the
trajectory of my life. My screenwriting
professors, every single one of them,
pushed me into the writer I am now, and
taught me every trick I know. Not only
did I begin to believe this storytelling
compulsion of mine was a viable
pursuit, but I started becoming who I
wanted to be. The screenwriting
program itself is the reason I got the
chance to be a working writer, and I
can’t thank them enough. I was lucky
enough to make amazing friends, some of
my closest, at SC—Nicole, Kathryn,
Shayna, Jen L., Erin, Angela, Bayan,
Morgan, Jen R., Tori, the Chez boys,
Traddies,     etc.—who      made      me
begrudgingly better (and delightfully
worse sometimes).
    After college, I faced the terrifying
prospect of an impossible career choice.
Luckily, I had Benderspink at my back,
especially my first manager, Christopher
Cosmos, who encouraged me to write
Red Queen. When I finished the first
draft, he sent it along to New Leaf
Literary, and set me on another life-
changing path. I landed with the best in
publishing: Pouya Shahbazian, who
continues to guide RQ and me through
the waters of the entertainment industry;
Kathleen Ortiz, my passport to the world
and the reason RQ continues to travel the
globe; Jo Volpe, our fearless captain and
wonderful friend; Danielle Barthel,
Jaida Temperly, Jess Dallow, and
Jackie Lindert, who tolerate my weird
requests      and     are     completely
indispensable; Dave Caccavo, a fellow
George Washington and USA soccer
enthusiast, and I’m told he’s good at
numbers; and sorry guys, I saved the best
for last, Suzie Townsend continues to be
my literary North Star. Red Queen is
now a real book because of so many
people, but especially her. She’s the
push, pull, and pat on the head I’ll
always need.
     When Suzie called to tell me we had
an offer on RQ, I told her I was driving
and might crash into a tree. I did not
crash, but I did accept the preempt from
Kari Sutherland and HarperTeen. As my
first editor, Kari held my hand on my
journey into the larger publishing world,
and turned a manuscript into a novel. I
cannot express my unending gratitude to
her, Alice Jerman, and the entire Harper
team: our dauntless leader and editor-in-
chief Kate Jackson; Jen Klonsky,
appetizer extraordinaire and fantastic
editorial director; production editors
Alexandra Alexo and Melinda Weigel;
copy editor Stephanie Evans, who
wrangles my commas like no other;
production manager Lillian Sun; design
wizards Sarah Kaufman, Alison
Klapthor, and Barb Fitzsimmons, along
with cover artist Michael Frost, you’ve
made a truly beautiful book; marketing
team Christina Colangelo and Elizabeth
Ward, putting RQ on the map; Emily
Butler, Kara Brammer, and Madison
Killen, for making me passable and
comfortable on camera, not to mention in
frame; the incomparable Gina Rizzo and
Sandee Roston, the publicity team
working around the clock to spread the
world; Ashton Quinn, for sales and great
support; the Epic Reads team, Margot
and Aubry, who have shimmied their
way into my cold heart; Elizabeth
Lynch(pin), one of the hardest working
people I know; and the joy that is
Kristen Pettit, who bravely leads RQ
and the rest of the series through its
journey.
    I won’t say it takes a village,
because that’s overdone (but seriously,
it takes a village). The rest of mine
includes my entertainment team—all the
troopers at Benderspink: the Jakes, JC,
Daniel, the ever-wrangling David, and
too many interns to thank. My lawyer
Steve Younger, aka my West Coast dad.
Sara Scott and Gennifer Hutchison, the
warrior princesses hopefully bringing
RQ to the big screen. And then there are
the people I’ve never met in real life,
who tweet and email and IM me through
each day. Publishing and entertainment
are very much alive on social media,
and I’ve met so many inspiring and
encouraging folks who welcomed me
into the fold. Every author, blogger,
writer, and fan is so valuable, and I
thank you all for your words and
support. Particularly Emma Theriault,
my Canadian twin, reader, critic, and
friend.
    I’m a writer, and that means I mostly
work alone, but I’m never truly that way.
Thank you so much to everyone who
stands by me and accepts my weirdness
—Culver, Morgan and Jen especially,
mindmeld Bayan, the arcane Erin, and
#Angela, who never judge me (out loud).
And my lifestyle staples that get me
through the days—Jackson Market, the
barista who never cares about my hobo
clothing, Target, fall foliage, Pottery
Barn, bookstores, yoga pants, tacky t-
shirts, the National Parks System, the
Patriots (both football and founding
fathers), George R.R. Martin, and
Wikipedia. I also have to thank the state
of Montana, where I wrote chapter two
and decided I was going all in on this
book-writing thing.
    I apologize for being so gushy, but
I’m almost done. Once more to Morgan,
my best friend and the kick in the pants I
need and never want. I will continue
leaving the hall light on. And again to my
parents, Heather and Louis. They let me
move home and focus on writing a book,
which is crazy. They helped me go to an
awesome but shockingly expensive
university far away, which is crazy.
They raised weirdo me into some
semblance of a functioning human, which
is crazy. And they continue to support,
love, sacrifice, and take me down a peg,
usually all at the same time. They got me
to where I am, and enabled this book,
this future, and this life to happen. Which
is crazy.
    BACK AD




  DISCOVER
your next favorite read

      MEET
 new authors to love

        WIN
        free books

       WATCH
     the latest videos

        SHARE
infographics, lists, quizzes

      SIGN UP
 for bookish fun & news


   epicreads.com
    ABOUT THE AUTHOR

VICTORIA AVEYARD was born and
raised     in     East     Longmeadow,
Massachusetts, a small town known only
for the worst traffic rotary in the
continental United States. She moved to
Los Angeles to earn a BFA in
screenwriting at the University of
Southern California, and stayed there
despite the lack of seasons. She is
currently an author and screenwriter,
using her career as an excuse to read too
many books and watch too many movies.
You can visit her online at
www.victoriaaveyard.com.
Discover great authors, exclusive offers,
and more at hc.com.
        CREDITS

COVER ART © 2015 BY MICHAEL
          FROST
  COVER DESIGN BY SARAH
    NICHOLE KAUFMAN
             COPYRIGHT

  HarperTeen is an imprint of HarperCollins
                 Publishers.

 RED QUEEN. Copyright © 2015 by Victoria
     Aveyard. Scarlet Guard symbol and King’s
  Crest symbol © & ™ 2014 Victoria Aveyard.
   Endpapers illustrated by Amanda Persky. All
    rights reserved under International and Pan-
 American Copyright Conventions. By payment
 of the required fees, you have been granted the
  nonexclusive, nontransferable right to access
  and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No
        part of this text may be reproduced,
 transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse-
 engineered, or stored in or introduced into any
information storage and retrieval system, in any
   form or by any means, whether electronic or
mechanical, now known or hereafter invented,
 without the express written permission of
          HarperCollins e-books.
            www.epicreads.com

    Library of Congress Control Number:
                2014952542
  ISBN 978-0-06-231063-7 (trade bdg.) —
     ISBN 978-0-06-236271-1 (int. ed.)
    EPub Edition © December 2014 ISBN
              9780062310651

14 15 16 17 18 PC/RRDH 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

              FIRST EDITION
 ABOUT THE PUBLISHER

              Australia
HarperCollins Publishers Australia Pty.
                Ltd.
    Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street
    Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia
     www.harpercollins.com.au

              Canada
       HarperCollins Canada
   2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor
   Toronto, ON M4W 1A8, Canada
       www.harpercollins.ca
            New Zealand
HarperCollins Publishers New Zealand
      Unit D1, 63 Apollo Drive
           Rosedale 0632
       Auckland, New Zealand
      www.harpercollins.co.nz

          United Kingdom
    HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
       1 London Bridge Street
        London SE1 9GF, UK
     www.harpercollins.co.uk

          United States
    HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
          195 Broadway
 New York, NY 10007
www.harpercollins.com
