1

Begin Reading
Table of Contents
About the Author
Copyright Page

Thank you for buying this
Tom Doherty Associates ebook.
To receive special oﬀers, bonus content,
and info on new releases and other great reads,
sign up for our newsletters.

Or visit us online at
us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup
For email updates on the author, click here.

2

The author and publisher have provided this e-book to you
without Digital Rights Management software (DRM) applied
so that you can enjoy reading it on your personal devices.
This e-book is for your personal use only. You may not print
or post this e-book, or make this e-book publicly available in
any way. You may not copy, reproduce, or upload this ebook, other than to read it on one of your personal devices.
Copyright infringement is against the law. If you
believe the copy of this e-book you are reading
infringes on the author’s copyright, please notify the
publisher at: us.macmillanusa.com/piracy.

3

To Patricia—
For never once forgetting.

4

The old gods may be great, but they are
neither kind nor merciful. They are ﬁckle,
unsteady as moonlight on water, or shadows
in a storm. If you insist on calling them, take
heed: be careful what you ask for, be willing
to pay the price. And no matter how
desperate or dire, never pray to the gods that
answer after dark.
Estele Magritte
1642–1719

5

Villon-sur-Sarthe, France
July 29, 1714

A girl is running for her life.
The summer air burns at her back, but there are no
torches, no angry mobs, only the distant lanterns of the
wedding party, the reddish glow of the sun as it breaks
against the horizon, cracks and spills across the hills, and
the girl runs, skirts tangling in the grass as she surges
toward the woods, trying to beat the dying light.
Voices carry on the wind, calling her name.
Adeline? Adeline? Adeline!
Her shadow stretches out ahead—too long, its edges
already blurring—and small white ﬂowers tumble from her
hair, littering the ground like stars. A constellation left in her
wake, almost like the one across her cheeks.
Seven freckles. One for every love she’d have, that’s what
Estele had said, when the girl was still young.
One for every life she’d lead.
One for every god watching over her.
Now, they mock her, those seven marks. Promises. Lies.
She’s had no loves, she’s lived no lives, she’s met no gods,
and now she is out of time.
But the girl doesn’t slow, doesn’t look back; she doesn’t
want to see the life that stands there, waiting. Static as a
drawing. Solid as a tomb.
Instead, she runs.

6

7

PART ONE
THE GODS THAT ANSWER AFTER
DARK

8

Title of Piece: Revenir
Artist: Arlo Miret
Date: 1721–22 AD
Medium: ash wood, marble
Location: On loan from the Museé d’Orsay
Description: A sculptural series of ﬁve wooden birds in various postures
and stages of pre-ﬂight, mounted on a narrow marble plinth.
Background: A diligent autobiographer, Miret kept journals that provide
insight into the artist’s mind and process. Regarding the inspiration for
Revenir, Miret attributed the idea to a ﬁgurine found on the streets of
Paris in the winter of 1715. The wooden bird, found with a broken wing,
is reputedly re-created as the ﬁfth in the sequence (albeit intact), about
to take ﬂight.
Estimated Value: $175,000

9

New York City
March 10, 2014

I
The girl wakes up in someone else’s bed.
She lies there, perfectly still, tries to hold time like a
breath in her chest; as if she can keep the clock from ticking
forward, keep the boy beside her from waking, keep the
memory of their night alive through sheer force of will.
She knows, of course, that she can’t. Knows that he’ll
forget. They always do.
It isn’t his fault—it is never their faults.
The boy is still asleep, and she watches the slow rise and
fall of his shoulders, the place where his dark hair curls
against the nape of his neck, the scar along his ribs. Details
long memorized.
His name is Toby.
Last night, she told him hers was Jess. She lied, but only
because she can’t say her real name—one of the vicious
little details tucked like nettles in the grass. Hidden barbs
designed to sting. What is a person, if not the marks they
leave behind? She has learned to step between the thorny
weeds, but there are some cuts that cannot be avoided—a
memory, a photograph, a name.
In the last month, she has been Claire, Zoe, Michelle—but
two nights ago, when she was Elle, and they were closing
down a late-night café after one of his gigs, Toby said that

10

he was in love with a girl named Jess—he simply hadn’t met
her yet.
So now, she is Jess.
Toby begins to stir, and she feels the old familiar ache in
her chest as he stretches, rolls toward her—but doesn’t
wake, not yet. His face is now inches from her, his lips
parted in sleep, black curls shadowing his eyes, dark lashes
against fair cheeks.
Once, the darkness teased the girl as they strolled along
the Seine, told her that she had a “type,” insinuating that
most of the men she chose—and even a few of the women—
looked an awful lot like him.
The same dark hair, the same sharp eyes, the same
etched features.
But that wasn’t fair.
After all, the darkness only looked the way he did because
of her. She’d given him that shape, chosen what to make of
him, what to see.
Don’t you remember, she told him then, when you were
nothing but shadow and smoke?
Darling, he’d said in his soft, rich way, I was the night
itself.
Now it is morning, in another city, another century, the
bright sunlight cutting through the curtains, and Toby shifts
again, rising up through the surface of sleep. And the girl
who is—was—Jess holds her breath again as she tries to
imagine a version of this day where he wakes, and sees her,
and remembers.
Where he smiles, and strokes her cheek, and says, “Good
morning.”
But it won’t happen like that, and she doesn’t want to see
the familiar vacant expression, doesn’t want to watch as the
boy tries to ﬁll in the gaps where memories of her should
be, witness as he pulls together his composure into

11

practiced nonchalance. The girl has seen that performance
often enough, knows the motions by heart, so instead she
slides from the bed and pads barefoot out into the living
room.
She catches her reﬂection in the hall mirror and notices
what everyone notices: the seven freckles, scattered like a
band of stars across her nose and cheeks.
Her own private constellation.
She leans forward and fogs the glass with her breath.
Draws her ﬁngertip through the cloud as she tries to write
her name. A—d—
But she only gets as far as that before the letters
dissolve. It’s not the medium—no matter how she tries to
say her name, no matter how she tries to tell her story. And
she has tried, in pencil, in ink, in paint, in blood.
Adeline.
Addie.
LaRue.
It is no use.
The letters crumble, or fade. The sounds die in her throat.
Her ﬁngers fall away from the glass and she turns,
surveying the living room.
Toby is a musician, and the signs of his art are
everywhere.
In the instruments that lean against the walls. In the
scribbled lines and notes scattered on tables—bars of halfremembered melodies mixed in with grocery lists and
weekly to-do’s. But here and there, another hand—the
ﬂowers he’s started keeping on the kitchen sill, though he
can’t remember when the habit started. The book on Rilke
he doesn’t remember buying. The things that last, even
when memories don’t.
Toby is a slow riser, so Addie makes herself tea—he
doesn’t drink it, but it’s already there, in his cupboard, a tin

12

of loose Ceylon, and a box of silk pouches. A relic of a latenight trip to the grocery store, a boy and a girl wandering
the aisles, hand in hand, because they couldn’t sleep.
Because she hadn’t been willing to let the night end. Wasn’t
ready to let go.
She lifts the mug, inhales the scent as memories waft up
to meet it.
A park in London. A patio in Prague. A team room in
Edinburgh.
The past drawn like a silk sheet over the present.
It’s a cold morning in New York, the windows fogged with
frost, so she pulls a blanket from the back of the couch and
wraps it around her shoulders. A guitar case takes up one
end of the sofa, and Toby’s cat takes up the other, so she
perches on the piano bench instead.
The cat, also named Toby (“So I can talk to myself without
it being weird…” he explained) looks at her as she blows on
her tea.
She wonders if the cat remembers.
Her hands are warmer now, and she sets the mug on top
of the piano and slides the cover up oﬀ the keys, stretches
her ﬁngers, and starts to play as softly as possible. In the
bedroom, she can hear Toby-the-human stirring, and every
inch of her, from skeleton to skin, tightens in dread.
This is the hardest part.
Addie could have left—should have left—slipped out when
he was still asleep, when their morning was still an
extension of their night, a moment trapped in amber. But it
is too late now, so she closes her eyes and continues to
play, keeps her head down as she hears his footsteps
underneath the notes, keeps her ﬁngers moving when she
feels him in the doorway. He’ll stand there, taking in the
scene, trying to piece together the timeline of last night,
how it could have gone astray, when he could have met a

13

girl and then taken her home, if he could have had too much
drink, why he doesn’t remember any of it.
But she knows that Toby won’t interrupt her as long as
she’s playing, so she savors the music for several more
seconds before forcing herself to trail oﬀ, look up, pretend
she doesn’t notice the confusion on his face.
“Morning,” she says, her voice cheerful, and her accent,
once country French, now so faint that she hardly hears it.
“Uh, good morning,” he says, running a hand through his
loose black curls, and to his credit, Toby looks the way he
always does—a little dazed, and surprised to see a pretty
girl sitting in his living room wearing nothing but a pair of
underwear and his favorite band T-shirt beneath the
blanket.
“Jess,” she says, supplying the name he can’t ﬁnd,
because it isn’t there. “It’s okay,” she says, “if you don’t
remember.”
Toby blushes, and nudges Toby-the-cat out of the way as
he sinks onto the couch cushions. “I’m sorry … this isn’t like
me. I’m not that kind of guy.”
She smiles. “I’m not that kind of girl.”
He smiles, too, then, and it’s a line of light breaking the
shadows of his face. He nods at the piano, and she wants
him to say something like, “I didn’t know you could play,”
but instead Toby says, “You’re really good,” and she is—it’s
amazing what you can learn when you have the time.
“Thanks,” she says, running her ﬁngertips across the
keys.
Toby is restless now, escaping to the kitchen. “Coﬀee?” he
asks, shuﬄing through the cupboards.
“I found tea.”
She starts to play a diﬀerent song. Nothing intricate, just
a strain of notes. The beginnings of something. She ﬁnds

14

the melody, takes it up, lets its slip between her ﬁngers as
Toby ducks back into the room, a steaming cup in his hands.
“What was that?” he asks, eyes brightening in that way
unique to artists—writers, painters, musicians, anyone
prone to moments of inspiration. “It sounded familiar…”
A shrug. “You played it for me last night.”
It isn’t a lie, not exactly. He did play it for her. After she
showed him.
“I did?” he says, brow furrowing. He’s already setting the
coﬀee aside, reaching for a pencil and a notepad oﬀ the
nearest table. “God—I must have been drunk.”
He shakes his head as he says it; Toby’s never been one
of those songwriters who prefer to work under the inﬂuence.
“Do you remember more?” he asks, turning through the
pad. She starts playing again, leading him through the
notes. He doesn’t know it, but he’s been working on this
song for weeks. Well, they have.
Together.
She smiles a little as she plays on. This is the grass
between the nettles. A safe place to step. She can’t leave
her own mark, but if she’s careful, she can give the mark to
someone else. Nothing concrete, of course, but inspiration
rarely is.
Toby’s got the guitar up now, balanced on one knee, and
he follows her lead, murmuring to himself. That this is good,
this is diﬀerent, this is something. She stops playing, gets to
her feet.
“I should go.”
The melody falls apart on the strings as Toby looks up.
“What? But I don’t even know you.”
“Exactly,” she says, heading for the bedroom to collect
her clothes.
“But I want to know you,” Toby says, setting down the
guitar and trailing her through the apartment, and this is the

15

moment when none of it feels fair, the only time she feels
the wave of frustration threatening to break. Because she
has spent weeks getting to know him. And he has spent
hours forgetting her. “Slow down.”
She hates this part. She shouldn’t have lingered. Should
have been out of sight as well as out of mind, but there’s
always that nagging hope that this time, it will be diﬀerent,
that this time, they will remember.
I remember, says the darkness in her ear.
She shakes her head, forcing the voice away.
“Where’s the rush?” asks Toby. “At least let me make you
breakfast.”
But she’s too tired to play the game again so soon, and so
she lies instead, says there’s something she has to do, and
doesn’t let herself stop moving, because if she does, she
knows she won’t have the strength to start again, and the
cycle will spin on, the aﬀair beginning in the morning
instead of at night. But it won’t be any easier when it ends,
and if she has to start over, she’d rather be a meet-cute at a
bar than the unremembered aftermath of a one-night stand.
It won’t matter, in a moment, anyways.
“Jess, wait,” Toby says, catching her hand. He fumbles for
the right words, and then gives up, starts again. “I have a
gig tonight, at the Alloway. You should come. It’s over on…”
She knows where it is, of course. That is where they met
for the ﬁrst time, and the ﬁfth, and the ninth. And when she
agrees to come, his smile is dazzling. It always is.
“Promise?” he asks.
“Promise.”
“I’ll see you there,” he says, the words full of hope as she
turns and steps through the door. She looks back, and says,
“Don’t forget me in the meantime.”
An old habit. A superstition. A plea.
Toby shakes his head. “How could I?”

16

She smiles, as if it’s just a joke.
But Addie knows, as she forces herself down the stairs,
that it’s already happening—knows that by the time he
closes the door, she’ll be gone.

17

II
March is such a ﬁckle month.
It is the seam between winter and spring—though seam
suggests an even hem, and March is more like a rough line
of stitches sewn by an unsteady hand, swinging wildly
between January gusts and June greens. You don’t know
what you’ll ﬁnd, until you step outside.
Estele used to call these the restless days, when the
warmer-blooded gods began to stir, and the cold ones
began to settle. When dreamers were most prone to bad
ideas, and wanderers were likely to get lost.
Addie has always been predisposed to both.
It makes sense then, that she was born on the 10th of
March, right along the ragged seam, though it has been so
long since Addie felt like celebrating.
For twenty-three years, she dreaded the marker of time,
what it meant: that she was growing up, growing old. And
then, for centuries, a birthday was a rather useless thing, far
less important than the night she signed away her soul.
That date a death, and a rebirth, rolled into one.
Still, it is her birthday, and a birthday deserves a gift.
She pauses in front of a boutique, her reﬂection ghosted
in the glass.
In the broad window, a mannequin poses mid-stride, its
head tilted ever so slightly to one side, as if listening to

18

some private song. Its long torso is wrapped in a broadstriped sweater, a pair of oil-slick leggings vanishing into
knee-high boots. One hand up, ﬁngers hooked in the collar
of the jacket that hangs over one shoulder. As Addie studies
the mannequin, she ﬁnds herself mimicking the pose,
shifting her stance, tilting her head. And maybe it’s the day,
or the promise of spring in the air, or maybe she’s simply in
the mood for something new.
Inside, the boutique smells of unlit candles and unworn
clothes, and Addie runs her ﬁngers over cotton and silk
before ﬁnding the striped knit sweater, which turns out to be
cashmere. She throws it over one arm, along with the
featured leggings. She knows her sizes.
They haven’t changed.
“Hi there!” The cheerful clerk is a girl in her early
twenties, like Addie herself, though one is real and aging
and the other is an image trapped in amber. “Can I get a
room started for you?”
“Oh, that’s okay,” she says, plucking a pair of boots from
a display. “I’ve got everything I need.” She follows the girl to
the three curtained stalls at the rear of the shop.
“Just give me a shout if I can help,” says the girl, turning
away before the curtain swings shut, and Addie is alone with
a pillowed bench, and a full-length mirror, and herself.
She kicks oﬀ her boots, and shrugs out of her jacket,
tossing it onto the seat. Change rattles in the pocket as it
lands, and something tumbles out. It hits the ﬂoor with a
dull clack and rolls across the narrow changing room,
stopping only when it meets the baseboard.
It is a ring.
A small circle carved of ash-gray wood. A familiar band,
once loved, now loathsome.
Addie stares at the thing a moment. Her ﬁngers twitch,
traitorous, but she doesn’t reach for the ring, doesn’t pick it

19

up, just turns her back on the small wooden circle and
continues undressing. She pulls on the sweater, shimmies
into the leggings, zips up the boots. The mannequin was
thinner, taller, but Addie likes the way the outﬁt hangs on
her, the warmth of the cashmere, the weight of the
leggings, the soft embrace of the lining in the boots.
She plucks the price tags oﬀ one by one, ignoring the
zeroes.
Joyeux anniversaire, she thinks, meeting her reﬂection.
Inclining her head, as if she too hears some private song.
The picture of a modern Manhattan woman, even if the face
in the mirror is the same one she’s had for centuries.
Addie leaves her old clothes strewn like a shadow across
the dressing room ﬂoor. The ring, a scorned child in the
corner. The only thing she reclaims is the discarded jacket.
It’s soft, made of black leather and worn practically to
silk, the kind of thing people pay a fortune for these days
and call it vintage. It is the only thing Addie refused to leave
behind and feed to the ﬂames in New Orleans, though the
smell of him clung to it like smoke, his stain forever on
everything. She does not care. She loves the jacket.
It was new then, but it is broken in now, shows its wear in
all the ways she can’t. It reminds her of Dorian Gray, time
reﬂected in cowhide instead of human skin.
Addie steps out of the little curtained booth.
Across the boutique, the clerk startles, ﬂustered at the
sight of her. “Everything ﬁt?” she asks, too polite to admit
she doesn’t remember letting someone into the back. God
bless customer service.
Addie shakes her head ruefully. “Some days you’re stuck
with what you’ve got,” she says, heading for the door.
By the time the clerk ﬁnds the clothes, a ghost of a girl on
the changing room ﬂoor, she won’t remember whose they

20

are, and Addie will be gone, from sight and mind and
memory.
She tosses the jacket over her shoulder, one ﬁnger
hooked in the collar, and steps out into the sun.

21

Villon-sur-Sarthe, France
Summer 1698

III
Adeline sits on a bench beside her father.
Her father, who is, to her, a mystery, a solemn giant most
at home inside his workshop.
Beneath their feet, a pile of woodwares make shapes like
small bodies under a blanket, and the cart wheels rattle as
Maxime, the sturdy mare, draws them down the lane, away
from home.
Away—away—a word that makes her small heart race.
Adeline is seven, the same as the number of freckles on
her face. She is bright and small and quick as a sparrow,
and has begged for months to go with him to market.
Begged until her mother swore she would go mad, until her
father ﬁnally said yes. He is a woodworker, her father, and
three times a year, he makes the trip along the Sarthe, up
to the city of Le Mans.
And today, she is with him.
Today, for the ﬁrst time, Adeline is leaving Villon.
She looks back at her mother, arms crossed beside the
old yew tree at the end of the lane, and then they round the
bend, and her mother is gone. The village rolls past, here
the houses and there the ﬁelds, here the church and there
the trees, here Monsieur Berger turning soil and there
Madame Therault hanging clothes, her daughter Isabelle

22

sitting in the grass nearby, twining ﬂowers into crowns, her
tongue between her teeth in concentration.
When Adeline told the girl about her trip, Isabelle had
only shrugged, and said, “I like it here.”
As if you couldn’t like one place and want to see another.
Now she looks up at Adeline, and waves as the cart goes
by. They reach the edge of the village, the farthest she has
ever gone before, and the cart hits a divot in the road, and
shakes as if it too has crossed a threshold. Adeline holds her
breath, expecting to feel some rope draw tight inside her,
binding her to the town.
But there is no tether, no lurch. The cart keeps moving,
and Adeline feels a little wild and a little scared as she turns
back to look at the shrinking picture of Villon, which was,
until now, the sum of her world, and is now only a part,
made smaller with the mare’s every step, until the town
seems like one of her father’s ﬁgurines, small enough to
nest within one calloused palm.
It is a day’s ride to Le Mans, the trek made easy with her
mother’s basket and her father’s company—one’s bread and
cheese to ﬁll her belly, and the other’s easy laugh, and
broad shoulders making shade for Adeline beneath the
summer sun.
At home he is a quiet man, committed to his work, but on
the road he begins to open, to unfold, to speak.
And when he speaks, it is to tell her stories.
Those stories he gathered, the way one gathers wood.
“Il était une fois,” he will say, before sliding into stories of
palaces and kings, of gold and glamour, of masquerade
balls and cities full of splendor. Once upon a time. This is
how the story starts.
She will not remember the stories themselves, but she
will recall the way he tells them; the words feel smooth as
river stones, and she wonders if he tells these stories when

23

he is alone, if he carries on, talking to Maxime in this easy,
gentle way. Wonders if he tells stories to the wood as he is
working it. Or if they are just for her.
Adeline wishes she could write them down.
Later, her father will teach her letters. Her mother will
have a ﬁt when she ﬁnds out, and accuse him of giving her
another way to idle, waste the hours of the day, but Adeline
will steal away into his workshop nonetheless, and he will let
her sit and practice writing her own name in the ﬁne dust
that always seems to coat the workshop ﬂoor.
But today, she can only listen.
The countryside rolls past around them, a jostling portrait
of a world she already knows. The ﬁelds are ﬁelds, just like
her own, the trees arranged in roughly the same order, and
when they do come upon a village, it is a watery reﬂection
of Villon, and Adeline begins to wonder if the world outside
is as boring as her own.
And then, the walls of Le Mans come into sight.
Stone ridges rising in the distance, a many-patterned
spine along the hills. It is a hundred times the size of Villon
—or at least, it is that grand in memory—and Adeline holds
her breath as they pass through the gates and into the
protected city.
Beyond, a maze of crowded streets. Her father guides the
cart between houses squeezed tight as stones, until the
narrow road opens onto a square.
There is a square back in Villon, of course, but it is little
bigger than their yard. This is a giant’s space, the ground
lost beneath so many feet, and carts, and stalls. And as her
father guides Maxime to a stop, Adeline stands on the bench
and marvels at the marketplace, the heady smell of bread
and sugar on the air, and people, people, everywhere she
looks. She has never seen so many of them, let alone ones
she does not know. They are a sea of strangers, unfamiliar

24

faces in unfamiliar clothes, with unfamiliar voices, calling
unfamiliar words. It feels as if the doors of her world have
been thrown wide, so many rooms added to a house she
thought she knew.
Her father leans against the cart, and talks to anyone who
passes by, and all the while his hands move over a block of
wood, a small knife nested in one palm. He shaves at the
surface with all the steady ease of someone peeling an
apple, ribbons falling between his ﬁngers. Adeline has
always loved to watch him work, to see the ﬁgures take
shape, as if they were there all along, but hidden, like pits in
the center of a peach.
Her father’s work is beautiful, the wood smooth where his
hands are rough, delicate where he is large.
And mixed among the bowls and cups, tucked between
the tools of his trade, are toys for sale, and wooden ﬁgures
as small as rolls of bread—a horse, a boy, a house, a bird.
Adeline grew up surrounded by such trinkets, but her
favorite is neither animal nor man.
It is a ring.
She wears it on a leather cord around her neck, a delicate
band, the wood ash gray, and smooth as polished stone. He
carved it when she was born, made for the girl she’d one
day be, and Adeline wears it like a talisman, an amulet, a
key. Her hand goes to it now and then, thumb running over
the surface the way her mother’s runs over a rosary.
She clings to it now, an anchor in the storm, as she
perches on the back of the cart, and watches everything.
From this angle she is almost tall enough to see the
buildings beyond. She stretches up onto her toes, wondering
how far they go, until a nearby horse jostles their cart as it
goes past, and she nearly falls. Her father’s hand closes
around her arm, pulling her back into the safety of his reach.

25

By the end of the day, the wooden wares are gone, and
Adeline’s father gives her a copper sol and says she may
buy anything she likes. She goes from stall to stall, eying
the pastries and the cakes, the hats and the dresses and the
dolls, but in the end, she settles on a journal, parchment
bound with waxy thread. It is the blankness of the paper
that excites her, the idea that she might ﬁll the space with
anything she likes.
She could not aﬀord the pencils to go with it, but her
father uses a second coin to buy a bundle of small black
sticks, and explains that these are charcoal, shows her how
to press the darkened chalk to the paper, smudge the line to
turn hard edges into shadow. With a few quick strokes, he
draws a bird in the corner of the page, and she spends the
next hour copying the lines, far more interesting than the
letters he’s written beneath.
Her father packs up the cart as the day gives way to
dusk.
They will stay the night in a local inn, and for the ﬁrst
time in her life, Adeline will sleep in a foreign bed, and wake
to foreign sounds and smells, and there will be a moment,
as brief as a yawn, when she won’t know where she is, and
her heart will quicken—ﬁrst with fear, and then with
something else. Something she does not have the words for
yet.
And by the time they return home to Villon, she will
already be a diﬀerent version of herself. A room with the
windows all thrown wide, eager to let in the fresh air, the
sunlight, the spring.

26

Villon-sur-Sarthe, France
Fall 1703

IV
It is a Catholic place, Villon. Certainly the part that shows.
There is a church in the center of town, a solemn stone
thing where everyone goes to save their souls. Adeline’s
mother and father kneel there twice a week, cross
themselves and say their blessings and speak of God.
Adeline is twelve now, so she does, too. But she prays the
way her father turns loaves of bread upright, the way her
mother licks her thumb to collect stray ﬂakes of salt.
As a matter of habit, more automatic than faith.
The church in town isn’t new, and neither is God, but
Adeline has come to think of Him that way, thanks to Estele,
who says the greatest danger in change is letting the new
replace the old.
Estele, who belongs to everyone, and no one, and herself.
Estele, who grew like a tree at the heart of the village by
the river, and has certainly never been young, who sprang
up from the ground itself with gnarled hands and woody skin
and roots deep enough to tap into her own hidden well.
Estele, who believes that the new God is a ﬁligreed thing.
She thinks that He belongs to cities and kings, and that He
sits over Paris on a golden pillow, and has no time for
peasants, no place among the wood and stone and river
water.
Adeline’s father thinks Estele is mad.

27

Her mother says that the woman is bound for Hell, and
once, when Adeline repeated as much, Estele laughed her
dry-leaf laugh and said there was no such place, only the
cool dark soil and the promise of sleep.
“And what of Heaven?” asked Adeline.
“Heaven is a nice spot in the shade, a broad tree over my
bones.”
At twelve, Adeline wonders which god she should pray to
now, to make her father change his mind. He has loaded up
his cart with wares bound for Le Mans, has harnessed
Maxime, but for the ﬁrst time in six years, she is not going
with him.
He has promised to bring her a fresh pad of parchment,
new tools with which to sketch. But they both know she
would rather go and have no gifts, would rather see the
world outside than have another pad to draw on. She is
running out of subjects, has memorized the tired lines of the
village, and all the familiar faces in it.
But this year, her mother has decided that it isn’t right for
her to go to market, it isn’t ﬁtting, even though Adeline
knows she can still ﬁt on that wooden bench beside her
father.
Her mother wishes she was more like Isabelle Therault,
sweet and kind and utterly incurious, content to keep her
eyes down upon her knitting instead of looking up at clouds,
instead of wondering what’s around the bend, over the hills.
But Adeline does not know how to be like Isabelle.
She does not want to be like Isabelle.
She wants only to go to Le Mans, and once there, to
watch the people and see the art all around, and taste the
food, and discover things she hasn’t heard of yet.
“Please,” she says, as her father climbs up into the cart.
She should have stowed away among the woodworks,
hidden safe beneath the tarp. But now it is too late, and

28

when Adeline reaches for the wheel, her mother catches her
by the wrist and pulls her back.
“Enough,” she says.
Her father looks at them, and then away. The cart sets
out, and when Adeline tries to tear free and run after the
cart, her mother’s hand ﬂashes out again, this time ﬁnding
her cheek.
Tears spring to her eyes, a vivid blush before the rising
bruise, and her mother’s voice when it lands is a second
blow.
“You are not a child anymore.”
And Adeline understands—and still does not understand
at all—feels as if she’s being punished for simply growing
up. She is so angry then that she wants to run away. Wants
to ﬂing her mother’s needlework into the hearth and break
every half-made sculpture in her father’s shop.
Instead, she watches the cart round the bend, and vanish
between trees, with one hand clenched around her father’s
ring. Adeline waits for her mother to let her go, and send
her on to do her chores.
And then she goes to ﬁnd Estele.
Estele, who still worships the old gods.
Adeline must have been ﬁve or six the ﬁrst time she saw
the woman drop her stone cup into the river. It was a pretty
thing, with a pattern pressed like lace into its sides, and the
old woman just let it fall, admiring the splash. Her eyes were
closed, and her lips were moving, and when Adeline
ambushed the old woman—she was already old, has always
been old—on the path home, Estele said she was praying to
the gods.
“What for?”
“Marie’s child isn’t coming as it should,” she said. “I
asked the river gods to make things ﬂow smooth. They are
good at that.”

29

“But why did you give them your cup?”
“Because, Addie, the gods are greedy.”
Addie. A pet name, one her mother scorned as boyish. A
name her father favored, but only when they were alone. A
name that rang like a bell in her bones. A name that suited
her far more than Adeline.
Now, she ﬁnds Estele in her garden, folded in among the
wild vines of squash, the thorny spine of a blackberry bush,
bent low as a warping branch.
“Addie.” The old woman says her name without looking
up.
It is autumn, and the ground is littered with the stones of
fruit that didn’t ripen as it should. Addie nudges them with
the toe of her shoe. “How do you talk to them?” she asks.
“The old gods. Do you call them by name?”
Estele straightens, joints cracking like dry sticks. If she’s
surprised by the question, it doesn’t show. “They have no
names.”
“Is there a spell?”
Estele gives her a pointed look. “Spells are for witches,
and witches are too often burned.”
“Then how do you pray?”
“With gifts, and praise, and even then, the old gods are
ﬁckle. They are not bound to answer.”
“What do you do then?”
“You carry on.”
She chews on the inside of her cheek. “How many gods
are there, Estele?”
“As many gods as you have questions,” answers the old
woman, but there is no scorn in her voice, and Addie knows
to wait her out, to hold her breath until she sees the telltale
sign of Estele’s softening. It is like waiting at a neighbor’s
door after you’ve knocked, when you know they are home.

30

She can hear the steps, the low rasp of the lock, and knows
that it will give.
Estele sighs open.
“The old gods are everywhere,” she says. “They swim in
the river, and grow in the ﬁeld, and sing in the woods. They
are in the sunlight on the wheat, and under the saplings in
spring, and in the vines that grow up the side of that stone
church. They gather at the edges of the day, at dawn, and
at dusk.”
Adeline’s eyes narrow. “Will you teach me? How to call on
them?”
The old woman sighs, knowing that Adeline LaRue is not
only clever, but also stubborn. She begins wading through
the garden to the house, and the girl follows, afraid that if
Estele reaches her front door before she answers, she might
close it on this conversation. But Estele looks back, eyes
keen in her wrinkled face.
“There are rules.”
Adeline hates rules, but she knows that sometimes they
are necessary.
“Like what?”
“You must humble yourself before them. You must oﬀer
them a gift. Something precious to you. And you must be
careful what you ask for.”
Adeline considers. “Is that all?”
Estele’s face darkens. “The old gods may be great, but
they are neither kind nor merciful. They are ﬁckle, unsteady
as moonlight on water, or shadows in a storm. If you insist
on calling them, take heed: be careful what you ask for, be
willing to pay the price.” She leans over Adeline, casting her
in shadow. “And no matter how desperate or dire, never
pray to the gods that answer after dark.”
Two days later, when Adeline’s father returns, he comes
bearing a fresh pad of parchment, and a bundle of black

31

lead pencils, bound with string, and the ﬁrst thing she does
is pick the best one, and sink it down into the ground behind
their garden, and pray that next time her father leaves, she
will be with him.
But if the gods hear, they do not answer.
She never goes to market again.

32

Villon-sur-Sarthe, France
Spring 1707

V
Blink, and the years fall away like leaves.
Adeline is sixteen now, and everyone speaks of her as if
she is a summer bloom, something to be plucked, and
propped within a vase, intended only to ﬂower and then to
rot. Like Isabelle, who dreams of family instead of freedom,
and seems content to brieﬂy blossom and then wither.
No, Adeline has decided she would rather be a tree, like
Estele. If she must grow roots, she would rather be left to
ﬂourish wild instead of pruned, would rather stand alone,
allowed to grow beneath the open sky. Better that than
ﬁrewood, cut down just to burn in someone else’s hearth.
She hefts the laundry on her hip and crests the rise,
making her way down the weedy slope to the river. When
she reaches the banks, she turns the basket out, dumping
the soiled clothes into the grass, and there, tucked like a
secret between the skirts and aprons and undergarments, is
the sketchbook. Not the ﬁrst—she has gathered them year
after year, careful to ﬁll every inch of space, to make the
most of each blank page.
But every one is like a taper burning on a moonless night,
always running out too fast.
It does not help that she keeps giving bits away.
She kicks oﬀ her shoes and slumps back against the
slope, her skirts pooling beneath her. She runs her ﬁngers

33

through the weedy grass and ﬁnds the fraying edge of the
paper, one of her favorite drawings, folded into a square
and driven down into the bank last week, just after dawn. A
token, buried like a seed, or a promise. An oﬀering.
Adeline still prays to the new God, when she must, but
when her parents are not looking she prays to the old ones,
too. She can do both: keep one tucked in her cheek like a
cherry pit while she whispers to the other.
So far, none of them have answered.
And yet, Adeline is sure that they are listening.
When George Caron began to look at her a certain way
last spring, she prayed for him to turn his gaze, and he
began to notice Isabelle instead. Isabelle has since become
his wife, and is now ripe with her ﬁrst child, and worn with
all the torments that come with it.
When Arnaud Tulle made his intentions clear last fall,
Adeline prayed that he would ﬁnd another girl. He did not,
but that winter he took ill and died, and Adeline felt terrible
for her relief, even as she fed more trinkets to the stream.
She has prayed, and someone must have heard, for she is
still free. Free from courtship, free from marriage, free from
everything except Villon. Left alone to grow.
And dream.
Adeline sits back on the slope, the sketchpad balanced on
her knees. She pulls the drawstring pouch from her pocket,
bits of charcoal and a few worn-down precious pencils
rattling like coins on market day.
She used to bind a bit of cloth around the stems to keep
her ﬁngers clean, until her father fashioned narrow bands of
wood around the blackened sticks, and showed her how to
hold the little knife, how to shave away the edges, and trim
the casing into points. And now the images are sharper, the
edges contoured, the details ﬁne. The pictures bloom like
stains across the paper, landscapes of Villon, and everyone

34

in it, too—the lines of her mother’s hair and her father’s
eyes and Estele’s hands, and then there, tucked into the
seams and edges of each page—
Adeline’s secret.
Her stranger.
Every bit of unused space she ﬁlls with him, a face drawn
so often that the gestures now feel eﬀortless, the lines
unfurling on their own. She can conjure him from memory,
even though they have never met.
He is, after all, only a ﬁgment of her mind. A companion
crafted ﬁrst from boredom, and then from longing.
A dream, to keep her company.
She doesn’t remember when it started, only that one day
she cast her gaze about the village and found every
prospect wanting.
Arnaud’s eyes were pleasant, but he had no chin.
Jacques was tall, but dull as dirt.
George was strong, but his hands were rough, his moods
rougher still.
And so she stole the pieces she found pleasant, and
assembled someone new.
A stranger.
It began as a game—but the more Adeline draws him, the
stronger the lines, the more conﬁdent the press of her
charcoal.
Black curls. Pale eyes. Strong jaw. Sloping shoulders and a
cupid’s bow mouth. A man she’d never meet, a life she’d
never know, a world she could only dream of.
When she is restless, she returns to the drawings, tracing
over the now familiar lines. And when she cannot sleep, she
thinks of him. Not the angle of his cheek, or the shade of
green she has conjured for his eyes, but his voice, his touch.
She lies awake and imagines him beside her, his long

35

ﬁngers tracing absent patterns on her skin. As he does, he
tells her stories.
Not the kind her father used to tell, of knights and
kingdoms, princesses and thieves. Not fairy tales and
warnings of venturing outside the lines, but stories that feel
like truths, renditions of the road, cities that sparkle, of the
world beyond Villon. And even though the words she puts in
his mouth are surely full of errors and lies, her stranger’s
conjured voice makes them sound so wonderful, so real.
If only you could see it, he says.
I would give anything, she answers.
One day, he promises. One day, I’ll show you. You’ll see it
all.
The words ache, even as she thinks them, the game
giving way to want, a thing too genuine, too dangerous. And
so, even in her imagination, she guides the conversation
back to safer roads.
Tell me about tigers, Adeline says, having heard of the
massive cats from Estele, who heard of them from the
mason, who was part of a caravan that included a woman
who claimed to have seen one.
Her stranger smiles, and gestures with his tapered
ﬁngers, and tells her of their silken fur, their teeth, their
furious roars.
On the slope, the laundry forgotten beside her, Adeline
turns her wooden ring absently with one hand as she draws
with the other, sketching out his eyes, his mouth, the line of
his bare shoulders. She breathes life into him with every
line. And with every stroke, coaxes out another story.
Tell me about dancing in Paris.
Tell me about sailing across the sea.
Tell me everything.
There was no danger in it, no reproach, not when she was
young. All girls are prone to dreaming. She will grow out of

36

it, her parents say—but instead, Adeline feels herself
growing in, holding tighter to the stubborn hope of
something more.
The world should be getting larger. Instead, she feels it
shrinking, tightening like chains around her limbs as the ﬂat
lines of her own body begin to curve out against it, and
suddenly the charcoal beneath her nails is unbecoming, as
is the idea that she would choose her own company over
Arnaud’s or George’s, or any man who might have her.
She is at odds with everything, she does not ﬁt, an insult
to her sex, a stubborn child in a woman’s form, her head
bowed and arms wrapped tight around her drawing pad as if
it were a door.
And when she does look up, her gaze always goes to the
edge of town.
“A dreamer,” scorns her mother.
“A dreamer,” mourns her father.
“A dreamer,” warns Estele.
Still, it does not seem such a bad word.
Until Adeline wakes up.

37

New York City
March 10, 2014

VI
There is a rhythm to moving through the world alone.
You discover what you can and cannot live without, the
simple necessities and small joys that deﬁne a life. Not food,
not shelter, not the basic things a body needs—those are,
for her, a luxury—but the things that keep you sane. That
bring you joy. That make life bearable.
Addie thinks of her father and his carvings, the way he
peeled away the bark, whittled down the wood beneath to
ﬁnd the shapes that lived inside. Michelangelo called it the
angel in the marble—though she’d not known that as a
child. Her father had called it the secret in the wood. He
knew how to reduce a thing, sliver by sliver, piece by piece,
until he found its essence; knew, too, when he’d gone too
far. One stroke too many, and the wood went from delicate
to brittle in his hands.
Addie has had three hundred years to practice her
father’s art, to whittle herself down to a few essential truths,
to learn the things she cannot do without.
And this is what she’s settled on: she can go without food
(she will not wither). She can go without heat (the cold will
not kill her). But a life without art, without wonder, without
beautiful things—she would go mad. She has gone mad.
What she needs are stories.

38

Stories are a way to preserve one’s self. To be
remembered. And to forget.
Stories come in so many forms: in charcoal, and in song,
in paintings, poems, ﬁlms. And books.
Books, she has found, are a way to live a thousand lives—
or to ﬁnd strength in a very long one.
Two blocks up Flatbush, she sees the familiar green
folding table on the sidewalk, covered in paperbacks, and
Fred hunched in his rickety chair behind it, red nose buried
in M is for Malice. The old man explained to her once, back
when he was on K is for Killer, how he was determined to
get through Grafton’s entire alphabet series before he dies.
She hopes he makes it. He has a nagging cough, and sitting
out here in the cold doesn’t help, but here he is, whenever
Addie comes by.
Fred doesn’t smile, or make small talk. What Addie knows
of him she has pried out word by word over the last two
years, the progress slow and halting. She knows he is a
widower who lives upstairs, knows the books belonged to
his wife, Candace, knows that when she died, he packed up
all her books and brought them down to sell, and it’s like
letting her go in pieces. Selling oﬀ his grief. Addie knows
that he sits down here because he’s afraid of dying in his
apartment, of not being found—not being missed.
“I keel over out here,” he says, “at least someone will
notice.”
He is a gruﬀ old man, but Addie likes him. Sees the
sadness in his anger, the guardedness of grief.
Addie suspects he doesn’t really want the books to sell.
He doesn’t price them, hasn’t read more than a few, and
sometimes his mood is so coarse, his tone so cold, he
actually scares the customers away. Still, they come, and
still, they buy, but every time the selection seems to thin a
new box appears, the contents are unpacked to ﬁll the gaps,

39

and in the last few weeks, Addie has once more begun to
spot new releases among the old, fresh covers and
unbroken spines in with the battered paperbacks. She
wonders if he is buying them, or if other people have begun
donating to his strange collection.
Addie slows, now, her ﬁngers dancing over the spines.
The selection is always a medley of discordant notes.
Thrillers, biographies, romance, battered mass markets,
mostly, interrupted by a few glossy hardcovers. She has
stopped to study them a hundred times, but today she
simply tips the book on the end into her hand, the gesture
light and swift as a magician’s. A piece of legerdemain.
Practice long given way to perfect. Addie tucks the book
under her arm and keeps walking.
The old man never looks up.

40

New York City
March 10, 2014

VII
The market sits like a cluster of old wives at the edge of the
park.
Long thin from winter, the number of white-capped stalls
is ﬁnally beginning to swell again, drops of color dotting the
square where new produce springs up between the root
vegetables, meat and bread, and other staples resistant to
the cold.
Addie weaves between the people, heading to the little
white tent nestled by the front gates of Prospect. Rise and
Shine is a coﬀee and pastry stall run by a pair of sisters that
remind Addie of Estele, if the old woman had been two
instead of one, divided along the lines of temper. If she had
been kinder, softer, or perhaps if she had simply lived
another life, another time.
The sisters are here year-round, come snow or sun, a
small constant in an ever-changing city.
“Hey, sugar,” says Mel, all broad shoulders, and wild
curls, and the kind of sweetness that makes strangers feel
like family. Addie loves that, the easy warmth, wants to
nestle into it like a well-worn sweater.
“What can we get for you?” asks Maggie, older, leaner,
laugh lines around her eyes belying the idea she rarely
smiles.

41

Addie orders a large coﬀee and two muﬃns, one
blueberry and the other chocolate chip, and then hands
over a crumpled ten that she’d found on Toby’s coﬀee table.
She could steal something from the market, of course, but
she likes this little stand, and the two women who run it.
“Got a dime?” asks Maggie.
Addie digs the change from her pocket, coming up with a
few quarters, a nickel—and there it is again, warm among
the cold metal coins. Her ﬁngers graze the wooden ring and
she clenches her teeth at the feel of it. Like a nagging
thought, impossible to shed. Sifting through the coins, Addie
is careful not to touch the wooden band again as she
searches her change, resists the urge to ﬂing the ring into
the weeds, knows it will not make a diﬀerence if she does. It
will always ﬁnd its way back.
The darkness whispers in her ear, arms wrapped like a
scarf around her throat.
I am always with you.
Addie plucks out a dime and pockets the rest.
Maggie hands back four dollars.
“Where you from, doll?” asks Mel, noticing the faintest
edge of an accent in the corners of Addie’s voice, reduced
these days to the vanishing end of an s, the slight softening
of a t. It has been so long, and yet, she cannot seem to let it
go.
“Here and there,” she says, “but I was born in France.”
“Oh la la,” says Mel in her ﬂat Brooklyn drawl.
“Here you go, sunshine,” says Maggie, passing her a bag
of pastries and a tall cup. Addie curls her ﬁngers around the
paper, relishing the heat on her cold palms. The coﬀee is
strong, and dark, and when she takes a sip, she feels the
warmth all the way down, and she is back in Paris again, in
Istanbul, in Naples.
A mouthful of memory.

42

She starts toward the park gates.
“Au revoir!” calls Mel, landing hard on every letter, and
Addie smiles into the steam.
The air is crisp inside the park. The sun is out, ﬁghting for
warmth, but the shade still belongs to winter, so Addie
follows the light, sinking onto a grassy slope beneath the
cloudless sky.
She sits the blueberry muﬃn on top of the paper bag, and
sips her coﬀee, examining the book she borrowed from
Fred’s table. She hadn’t bothered to look at what she was
taking, but now her heart sinks a little at the sight of the
paperback, the cover soft with wear, the title in German.
Kinder und Hausmärchen it reads, by Brüder Grimm.
Grimm’s Fairy Tales.
Her German is rusty, kept in the back of her mind, in a
corner she hasn’t used much since the war. Now she dusts it
oﬀ, knows that beneath the layer of grime she will ﬁnd the
space intact, undisturbed. The boon of memory. She turns
through the fragile old pages, eyes tripping over the words.
Once upon a time, she loved this kind of story.
When she was still a child, and the world was small, and
she dreamed of open doors.
But Addie knows too well now, knows that these stories
are full of foolish humans doing foolish things, warning tales
of gods and monsters and greedy mortals who want too
much, and then fail to understand what they’ve lost. Until
the price is paid, and it’s too late to claim it back.
A voice rises like smoke inside her chest.
Never pray to the gods who answer after dark.
Addie tosses the book aside and slumps back into the
grass, closing her eyes as she tries to savor the sun.

43

Villon-sur-Sarthe, France
July 29, 1714

VIII
Adeline had wanted to be a tree.
To grow wild and deep, belong to no one but the ground
beneath her feet, and the sky above, just like Estele. It
would be an unconventional life, and perhaps a little lonely,
but at least it would be hers. She would belong to no one
but herself.
But here is the danger of a place like Villon.
Blink—and a year is gone.
Blink—and ﬁve more follow.
It is like a gap between stones, this village, just wide
enough for things to get lost. The kind of place where time
slips and blurs, where a month, a year, a life can go missing.
Where everyone is born and buried in the same ten-meter
plot.
Adeline was going to be a tree.
But then came Roger, and his wife, Pauline. Grown up
together, and then married, and then gone, in the time it
took for her to lace up a pair of boots.
A hard pregnancy, a ruinous birth, two deaths instead of
one new life.
Three small children left behind, where there should have
been four. The earth still fresh over a grave, and Roger
looking for another wife, a mother for his children, a second
life at the cost of Adeline’s one and only.

44

Of course, she said no.
Adeline is three and twenty, already too old to wed.
Three and twenty, a third of a life already buried.
Three and twenty—and then gifted like a prize sow to a
man she does not love, or want, or even know.
She said no, and learned how much the word was worth.
Learned that, like Estele, she had promised herself to the
village, and the village had a need.
Her mother said it was duty.
Her father said it was mercy, though Adeline doesn’t
know for whom.
Estele said nothing, because she knew it wasn’t fair. Knew
this was the risk of being a woman, of giving yourself to a
place, instead of a person.
Adeline was going to be a tree, and instead, people have
come brandishing an ax.
They have given her away.
She lies awake the night before the wedding, and thinks
of freedom. Of ﬂeeing. Of stealing away on her father’s
horse, even as she knows the thought is madness.
She feels mad enough to do it.
Instead, she prays.
She has been praying, of course, since the day of her
betrothal, given half her possessions to the river and buried
the other half in the ﬁeld or at the slope of dirt and brush
where the village meets the woods, and now she is almost
out of time, and out of tokens.
She lies there in the dark, twists the old wooden ring on
its leather cord, and considers going out and praying again
now, in the dead of night, but Adeline remembers Estele’s
fearsome warning about the ones who might answer. So
instead, she clenches her hands together and prays to her
mother’s God instead. Prays for help, for a miracle, for a

45

way out. And then in the darkest part of night, she prays for
Roger’s death—anything for her escape.
She feels guilty at once, sucks it back into her chest like
an expelled breath, and waits.

Day breaks like an egg yolk, spilling yellow light across the
ﬁeld.
Adeline slips out of the house before dawn, having never
slept at all. Now she winds her way through the wild grass
beyond the vegetable garden, skirts wicking up the dew.
She lets herself sink with the weight of them, her favorite
drawing pencil clutched in one hand. Adeline does not want
to give it up, but she is running out of time and out of
tokens.
She presses the pencil point down into the damp soil of
the ﬁeld.
“Help me,” she whispers to the grass, its edges limned
with light. “I know you are there. I know you are listening.
Please. Please.”
But the grass is only grass, and the wind is only wind, and
neither answers, even when she presses her forehead to the
ground and sobs.
There is nothing wrong with Roger.
But there is nothing right, either. His skin is waxy, his
blond hair thinning, his voice like a wisp of wind. When his
hand lays itself upon her arm, the grip is weak, and when he
inclines his head toward hers, his breath is stale.
And Adeline? She is a vegetable left too long in the
garden, its skin gone stiﬀ, its insides woody, gone to ground
by choice, only to be dug up and made into a meal.
“I do not want to marry him,” she says, ﬁngers tangled in
the weedy earth.

46

“Adeline!” calls her mother, as if she is one of the
livestock, gone astray.
She drags herself up, empty with anger and grief, and
when she goes inside her mother sees only the dirt caking
her hands, and orders her daughter to the basin. Adeline
scrubs the soil from beneath her nails, bristles biting her
ﬁngers as her mother scolds.
“What will your husband think?”
Husband.
A word like a millstone, all weight and no warmth.
Her mother tuts. “You will not be so restless once you
have children to tend.”
Adeline thinks again of Isabelle, two small boys clinging to
her skirts, a third in a basket by the hearth. They used to
dream together, but she has aged ten years in two, it
seems. She is always tired, and there are hollows in her face
where once her cheeks were red from laughter.
“It will be good for you,” says her mother, “to be
somebody’s wife.”

The day passes like a sentence.
The sun falls like a scythe.
Adeline can almost hear the whistle of the blade as her
mother braids her hair into a crown, weaves ﬂowers in the
place of jewels. Her dress is simple and light, but it might as
well be made of mail for how it weighs on her.
She wants to scream.
Instead, she reaches up and grips the wooden ring around
her neck, as if for balance.
“You must take that oﬀ before the ceremony,” instructs
her mother, and Adeline nods, even as her ﬁngers tighten
around it.

47

Her father comes in from the barn, dusted with wood
shavings and smelling of sap. He coughs, a faint rattle, like
loose seeds, inside his chest. It has been there for a year,
that cough, but he will not let them talk of it.
“You are almost ready?” he asks.
What a foolish question.
Her mother talks about the wedding dinner as if it has
already come and gone. Adeline looks out the window at the
sinking sun, and doesn’t listen to the words, but she can
hear the light in her mother’s voice, the vindication in it.
Even in her father’s eyes, there is a measure of relief. Their
daughter tried to carve her own road, but now things are
being set right, a wayward life dragged back on course,
propelled down its proper path.
The house is too warm, the air heavy and still, and
Adeline cannot breathe.
Finally the church bell tolls, the same low tone it calls at
funerals, and she forces herself to her feet.
Her father touches her arm.
His face is sorry, but his grip is ﬁrm.
“You will come to love your husband,” he says, but the
words are clearly more wish than promise.
“You will be a good wife,” says her mother, and hers are
more command than wish.
And then Estele appears in the doorway, dressed as if she
is in mourning. And why shouldn’t she be? This woman who
taught her of wild dreams and willful gods, who ﬁlled
Adeline’s head with thoughts of freedom, blew on the
embers of hope and let her believe a life could be her own.
The light has gone watery and thin behind Estele’s gray
head. There is still time, Adeline tells herself, but it is
ﬂeeting, faster now with every breath.
Time—how often has she heard it described as sand
within a glass, steady, constant. But that is a lie, because

48

she can feel it quicken, crashing toward her.
Panic beats a drum inside her chest, and outside, the path
is a single dark line, stretched straight and narrow toward
the village square. On the other side, the church stands
waiting, pale and stiﬀ as a tombstone, and she knows that if
she walks in, she will not come out.
Her future will rush by the same as her past, only worse,
because there will be no freedom, only a marriage bed and
a deathbed and perhaps a childbed between, and when she
dies it will be as though she never lived.
There will be no Paris.
No green-eyed lover.
No trips on boats to faraway lands.
No foreign skies.
No life beyond this village.
No life at all, unless—
Adeline pulls free of her father’s grip, drags to a stop on
the path.
Her mother turns to look at her, as if she might run, which
is exactly what she wants to do, but knows she can’t.
“I made a gift for my husband,” says Adeline, mind
spinning. “I’ve left it in the house.”
Her mother softens, approving.
Her father stiﬀens, suspicious.
Estele’s eyes narrow, knowing.
“I’ll just fetch it,” she continues, already turning back.
“I’ll go with you,” says her father, and her heart lurches
and her ﬁngers twitch, but it is Estele who reaches out to
stop him.
“Jean,” she says in that sly way, “Adeline cannot be your
daughter and his wife. She is a woman grown, not a child to
be minded.”
He ﬁnds his daughter’s eyes, and says, “Be quick.”
Adeline has already taken ﬂight.

49

Back up the path, and past the door, into the house, and
through, to the other side, to the open window, and the
ﬁeld, and the distant line of trees. The woods standing
sentinel at the eastern edge of the village, opposite the sun.
The woods, already cloaked in shadow, though she knows
there is still light, still time.
“Adeline?” calls her father, but she doesn’t look back.
Instead, she climbs through the window, wood snagging
on the wedding dress as she stumbles out, and runs.
“Adeline? Adeline!”
The voices call out after her, but they stretch thinner with
every step, and soon she is across the ﬁeld, and into the
woods, breaking the line of trees as she sinks to her knees
in the dense summer dirt.
She clutches the wooden ring, feels the loss of it even
before she tugs the leather cord over her head. Adeline
does not want to sacriﬁce it, but she has used up all her
tokens, given every gift she could spare back to the earth,
and none of the gods have answered. Now this is all she has
left, and the light is thin, and the village is calling, and she is
desperate to escape.
“Please,” she whispers, her voice breaking over the word
as she plunges the band down into the mossy earth. “I will
do anything.”
The trees murmur overhead, and then go still, as if they
too are waiting, and Adeline prays, to every god in the Villon
woods, to anyone and anything who will listen. This cannot
be her life. This cannot be all there is.
“Answer me,” she pleads as the damp seeps into her
wedding dress.
She squeezes her eyes shut, and strains to hear, but the
only sound is her own voice on the wind and her name,
echoing in her ears like a heartbeat.
“Adeline…”

50

“Adeline…”
“Adeline…”
She bows her head against the soil and grips the dark
earth and screams, “Answer me!”
The silence is mocking.
She has lived here all her life and never heard the woods
this quiet. Cold settles over her, and she doesn’t know if it’s
coming from the forest or from her own bones, giving up the
last of their ﬁght. Her eyes are still shut tight, and perhaps
that is why she doesn’t notice that the sun has slipped
behind the village at her back, that dusk has given way to
dark.
Adeline keeps praying, and doesn’t notice at all.

51

Villon-sur-Sarthe, France
July 29, 1714

IX
The sound, when it comes, is a low rumble, deep and distant
as thunder.
Laughter, Adeline thinks, opening her eyes and noticing,
ﬁnally, how the light has faded.
She looks up, but sees nothing. “Hello?”
The laughter draws itself into a voice, somewhere behind
her.
“You need not kneel,” it says. “Let us see you on your
feet.”
She scrambles up, and turns, but she is met only by
darkness, surrounded by it, a moonless night after the
summer sun has ﬂed. And Adeline knows, then, that she has
made a mistake. That this is one of the gods she was
warned against.
“Adeline? Adeline?” call the voices from the town, as faint
and faraway as the wind.
She squints into the shadows between the trees, but
there is no shape, no god to be found—only that voice, close
as a breath against her cheek.
“Adeline, Adeline,” it says, mocking, “… they are calling
for you.”
She turns again, ﬁnding nothing but deep shadow. “Show
yourself,” she orders, her own voice sharp and brittle as a
stick.

52

Something brushes her shoulder, grazes her wrist, drapes
itself around her like a lover. Adeline swallows. “What are
you?”
The shadow’s touch withdraws. “What am I?” it asks, an
edge of humor in that velvet tone. “That depends on what
you believe.”
The voice splits, doubles, rattling through tree limbs and
snaking over moss, folding over on itself until it is
everywhere.
“So tell me—tell me—tell me,” it echoes. “Am I the devil—
the devil—or the dark—dark—dark? Am I a monster—
monster—or a god—god—god—or…”
The shadows in the woods begin to pull together, drawn
like storm clouds. But when they settle, the edges are no
longer wisps of smoke, but hard lines, the shape of a man,
made ﬁrm by the light of the village lanterns at his back.
“Or am I this?”
The voice spills from a perfect pair of lips, a shadow
revealing emerald eyes that dance below black brows, black
hair that curls across his forehead, framing a face Adeline
knows too well. One that she has conjured up a thousand
times, in pencil and charcoal and dream.
It is the stranger.
Her stranger.
She knows it is a trick, a shadow parading as a man, but
the sight of him still robs her breath. The darkness looks
down at his shape, seeing himself as if for the ﬁrst time, and
seems to approve. “Ah, so the girl believes in something
after all.” Those green eyes lift. “Well now,” he says, “you
have called, and I have come.”
Never pray to the gods that answer after dark.
Adeline knows—she knows—but this is the only one who
answered. The only one who would help.
“Are you prepared to pay?”

53

Pay.
The price.
The ring.
Adeline drops to her knees, scours the ground until she
ﬁnds the leather cord, and frees her father’s ring from the
soil.
She holds it out to the god, its pale wood now stained
with dirt, and he draws closer. He may look like ﬂesh and
blood, but he still moves like shadow. A single step, and he
is there, ﬁlling her vision, folding one hand around the ring,
and resting the other on Adeline’s cheek. His thumb brushes
the freckle beneath her eye, the edge of her stars.
“My dear,” says the darkness, taking the ring, “I do not
deal in trinkets.”
The wooden band crumbles in his hand, and falls away,
nothing more than smoke. A strangled sound escapes her
lips—it hurt enough to lose the ring, hurts more to see it
wiped from the world like a smudge on skin. But if the ring is
not enough, then what?
“Please,” she says, “I will give anything.”
The shadow’s other hand still rests against her cheek.
“You assume I want anything,” he says, lifting her chin. “But
I take only one coin.” He leans closer still, green eyes
impossibly bright, his voice soft as silk. “The deals I make, I
make for souls.”
Adeline’s heart lurches in her chest.
In her mind, she sees her mother on her knees in church,
speaking of God and Heaven, hears her father talking,
telling stories of wishes and riddles. She thinks of Estele,
who believes in nothing but a tree over her bones. Who
would say that a soul is nothing more than a seed returned
to soil—though she’s the one who warned against the dark.
“Adeline,” says the darkness, her name sliding like moss
between his teeth. “I am here. Now tell me why.”

54

She has waited so long to be met—to be answered, to be
asked—that at ﬁrst the words all fail her.
“I do not want to marry.”
She feels so small when she says it. Her whole life feels
small, and she sees that judgment reﬂected in the god’s
gaze, as if to say, Is that all?
And no, it is more than that. Of course it is more.
“I do not want to belong to someone else,” she says with
sudden vehemence. The words are a door ﬂung wide, and
now the rest pour out of her. “I do not want to belong to
anyone but myself. I want to be free. Free to live, and to ﬁnd
my own way, to love, or to be alone, but at least it is my
choice, and I am so tired of not having choices, so scared of
the years rushing past beneath my feet. I do not want to die
as I’ve lived, which is no life at all. I—”
The shadow cuts her oﬀ, impatient. “What use is it, to tell
me what you do not want?” His hand slides through her hair,
comes to rest against the back of her neck, drawing her
close. “Tell me instead what you want most.”
She looks up. “I want a chance to live. I want to be free.”
She thinks of the years slipping by.
Blink, and half your life is gone.
“I want more time.”
He considers her, those green eyes changing shade, now
spring grass, now summer leaf. “How long?”
Her mind spins. Fifty years. One hundred. Every number
feels too small.
“Ah,” says the darkness, reading her silence. “You do not
know.” Again, the green eyes shift, darken. “You ask for time
without limit. You want freedom without rule. You want to be
untethered. You want to live exactly as you please.”
“Yes,” says Adeline, breathless with want, but the
shadow’s expression sours. His hand drops from her skin,

55

and then he is no longer there, but leaning against a tree
several strides away.
“I decline,” he says.
Adeline draws back as if struck. “What?” She has come
this far, has given everything she has—she made her
choice. She cannot go back to that world, that life, that
present and past without a future. “You cannot decline.”
One dark brow lifts, but there is no amusement in that
face.
“I am not some genie, bound to your whim.” He pushes
oﬀ the tree. “Nor am I some petty forest spirit, content with
granting favors for mortal trinkets. I am stronger than your
god and older than your devil. I am the darkness between
stars, and the roots beneath the earth. I am promise, and
potential, and when it comes to playing games, I divine the
rules, I set the pieces, and I choose when to play. And
tonight, I say no.”
Adeline? Adeline? Adeline?
Beyond the edge of the woods, the village lights are
closer now. There are torches in the ﬁeld. They are coming
for her.
The shadow looks over his shoulder. “Go home, Adeline.
Back to your small life.”
“Why?” she pleads, grabbing his arm. “Why do you refuse
me?”
He brushes his hand along her cheek, the gesture soft
and warm as hearthsmoke. “I am not in the business of
charity. You ask for too much. How many years until you’re
sated? How many, until I get my due? No, I make deals with
endings, and yours has none.”
She will come back to this moment a thousand times.
In frustration, and regret, in sorrow, and self-pity, and
unbridled rage.

56

She will come to face the fact that she cursed herself
before he ever did.
But here, and now, all she can see is the ﬂickering
torchlight of Villon, and the green eyes of the stranger she
once dreamed of loving, and the chance to escape slipping
away with his touch.
“You want an ending,” she says. “Then take my life when I
am done with it. You can have my soul when I don’t want it
anymore.”
The shadow tips his head, suddenly intrigued.
A smile—just like the smile in her drawings, askance, and
full of secrets—crosses his mouth. And then he pulls her to
him. A lover’s embrace. He is smoke and skin, air and bone,
and when his mouth presses against hers, the ﬁrst thing she
tastes is the turning of the seasons, the moment when dusk
gives way to night. And then his kiss deepens. His teeth
skim her bottom lip, and there is pain in the pleasure,
followed by the copper taste of blood on her tongue.
“Done,” whispers the god against her lips.
And then the world goes black, and she is falling.

57

Villon-sur-Sarthe, France
July 29, 1714

X
Adeline shivers.
She looks down, and sees that she is sitting on a bed of
wet leaves.
A second ago, she was falling—for only a second, barely
the length it takes to draw a breath—but time, it seems, has
skipped ahead. The stranger is gone, and so are the last
dregs of light. The summer sky, where it shows through the
canopied trees, is smoothed to a velvet black, marked only
by a low-hanging moon.
Adeline rises, studying her hands, looking past the dirt for
some sign of transformation.
But she feels … unchanged. A little dizzy, perhaps, as if
she’s stood too quickly, or drunk too much wine on an
empty stomach, but after a moment even that unsteadiness
has passed, and she’s left feeling as if the world has tipped,
but not fallen, leaned, and then rebalanced, settled back
into the same old groove.
She licks her lips, expecting to taste blood, but the mark
left by the stranger’s teeth is gone, swept away with every
other trace of him.
How does one know if a spell has worked? She asked for
time, for life—will she have to wait a year, or three, or ﬁve,
to see if age leaves any mark? Or take up a knife and cut
into her skin, to see if and how it heals? But no, she had

58

asked for life, not a life unscathed, and if Adeline is being
honest, she is afraid to test it, afraid to ﬁnd her skin still too
yielding, afraid to learn that the shadow’s promise was a
dream, or worse, a lie.
But she knows one thing—whether or not the deal was
real, she will not heed the ringing church bells, will not
marry Roger. She will defy her family. She will leave Villon, if
she must. She knows she will do whatever it takes now,
because she was willing in the dark, and one way or
another, from this moment forward, her life will be her own.
The thought is thrilling. Terrifying, but thrilling, as she
leaves the forest.
She is halfway across the ﬁeld before she realizes how
quiet the village is.
How dark.
The festive lanterns have been put out, the bells have
stopped ringing, there are no voices calling her name.
Adeline makes her way home, the dull dread growing a
little sharper with every step. By the time she gets there,
her mind is buzzing with worry. The front door hangs open,
spilling light onto the path, and she can hear her mother
humming in the kitchen, her father chopping wood around
the side of the house. A normal night, made wrong by the
fact it was not meant to be a normal night.
“Maman!” she says, stepping inside.
A plate shatters to the ﬂoor, and her mother yelps, not in
pain, but surprise, her face contorted.
“What are you doing here?” she demands, and here is the
anger Addie expected. Here is the dismay.
“I’m sorry,” she starts. “I know you must be mad, but I
couldn’t—”
“Who are you?”
The words are a hiss, and she realizes then, that
fearsome look on her mother’s face is not the anger of a

59

mother scorned, but that of a woman scared.
“Maman—”
Her mother cringes away from the very word. “Get out of
my house.”
But Adeline crosses the room, grabs her by the shoulders.
“Don’t be absurd. It’s me, A—”
She is about to say Adeline.
Indeed, she tries. Three syllables should not be such a
mountain to climb, but she is breathless by the end of the
ﬁrst, unable to manage the second. The air turns to stone
inside her throat, and she is left stiﬂed, silent. She tries
again, this time attempting Addie, then at last their family
name, LaRue, but it is no use. The words meet an impasse
between her mind and tongue. And yet, the second she
draws breath to say another word, any other word, it is
there, lungs ﬁlled and throat loose.
“Let go,” pleads her mother.
“What’s this?” demands a voice, low and deep. The voice
that soothed Adeline on sick nights, that told her stories as
she sat on the ﬂoor of his shop.
Her father stands in the doorway, his arms full of wood.
“Papa,” she says, and he draws back, as if the word were
sharp.
“The woman is mad,” sobs her mother. “Or cursed.”
“I am your daughter,” she says again.
Her father grimaces. “We have no child.”
Those words, a duller knife. A deeper cut.
“No,” says Adeline, shaking her head at the absurdity. She
is three and twenty, has lived every day and every night
beneath this roof. “You know me.”
How can they not? The resemblance between them has
always been so keen, her father’s eyes, her mother’s chin,
one’s brow and the other’s lips, each piece clearly copied
from its source.

60

They see it, too, they must.
But to them, it is only proof of devilry.
Her mother crosses herself, and her father’s hands close
around her, and she wants to sink into the strength of his
embrace, but there is not warmth in it as he drags her to the
door.
“No,” she begs.
Her mother is crying now, one hand to her mouth and the
other clutching the wooden cross around her neck, as she
calls her own daughter a demon, a monster, a demented
thing, and her father says nothing, only grips her arm
tighter as he pulls her from the house.
“Be gone,” he says, the words half-pleading.
Sadness sweeps across his face, but not the kind that
comes with knowing. No, it is the sadness reserved for lost
things, a storm-torn tree, a horse made lame, a carving split
one stroke before it’s done.
“Please,” she begs. “Papa—”
His face hardens as he forces her out into the dark and
slams the door. The bolt scrapes home. Adeline stumbles
back, shaking with shock and horror. And then she turns and
runs.

“Estele.”
The name begins as a prayer, soft and private, and grows
to a shout as Adeline nears the woman’s cottage.
“Estele!”
A lamp is lit within, and by the time she reaches the edge
of the light, the old woman stands in the open doorway,
waiting for her caller.
“Are you a stranger or a spirit?” Estele asks warily.
“I am neither,” says Adeline, though she knows how she
must look. Her dress tattered, her hair wild, streaming
61

words like witchcraft on the step. “I am ﬂesh and blood and
human, and I have known you all my life. You make charms
in the shape of children to keep them well in winter. You
think peaches are the sweetest fruit, and that church walls
are too thick for prayers to get through, and you want to be
buried not beneath a stone, but in a patch of shade under a
large tree.”
Something ﬂashes across the old woman’s face, and
Adeline holds her breath, hoping it is recognition. But it is
too brief.
“You are a clever spirit,” says Estele, “but you will not
cross this hearth.”
“I am not a spirit!” shouts Adeline, storming into the light
of the old woman’s door. “You taught me about the old gods,
and all the ways to summon them, but I made a mistake.
They wouldn’t answer, and the sun was going down so fast.”
She wraps her arms tight around her ribs, unable to stop
shaking. “I prayed too late, and something answered, and
now everything is wrong.”
“Foolish girl,” chides Estele, sounding like herself.
Sounding as if she knows her.
“What do I do? How do I ﬁx it?”
But the old woman only shakes her head. “The darkness
plays its own game,” she says. “It makes its own rules,” she
says. “And you have lost.”
And with that, Estele draws back into her house.
“Wait!” calls Adeline as the old woman shuts the door.
The bolt drives home.
Adeline hurls herself against the wood, sobbing until her
legs give way, and she sinks to her knees on the cold stone
step, one ﬁst still pounding against the wood.
And then, suddenly, the bolt draws back.
The door swings open, and Estele stands over her.

62

“What is this?” she asks, surveying the girl folded on her
steps.
The old woman looks at her as if they’ve never met. The
moments before erased by an instant and a closed door.
Her wrinkled gaze ﬂicks over the stained wedding dress,
the wild hair, the dirt under her nails, but there’s no
knowing in her face, only a guarded curiosity.
“Are you a spirit? Or a stranger?”
Adeline squeezes her eyes shut. What is happening? Her
name is still a rock lodged deep, and when she was a spirit,
she was banished, so she swallows hard and answers, “A
stranger.” Tears begin to slide down Adeline’s face. “Please,”
she manages. “I have nowhere to go.”
The old woman looks at her for a long moment, and then
nods.
“Wait here,” she says, slipping back into the house, and
Adeline will never know what Estele was going to do then,
because the door swings shut, and stays shut, and she is
left kneeling on the ground, trembling more from shock than
cold.
She doesn’t know how long she sits there, but her legs
are stiﬀ when she forces them to bear her weight. She rises,
and walks past the old woman’s house to the line of trees
beyond, past their sentinels’ edge into the crowded dark.
“Show yourself!” she calls out.
But there is only the ruﬄe of feathers, the crackle of
leaves, the ripple of a forest disturbed in sleep. She conjures
his face, those green eyes, those black curls, tries to will the
darkness into shape again, but moments pass, and she is
still alone.
I do not want to belong to anyone.
Adeline walks deeper into the forest. This is a wilder
stretch of wood, the ﬂoor a nest of bramble and brush. It
claws at her bare legs, but she doesn’t stop, not until the

63

trees have closed around her, their branches blotting out
the moon overhead.
“I call on you!” she screams.
I am not some genie, bound to your whim.
A low limb, half buried by the forest ﬂoor, rises just
enough to catch her feet, and she goes down hard, knees
hitting ragged earth and hands tearing through weedy soil.
Please, I will give anything.
The tears come, then, sudden and heaving. Fool. Fool.
Fool. She pounds her ﬁsts against the ground.
This is a vile trick, she thinks, a horrid dream, but it will
pass.
That is the nature of dreams. They do not last.
“Wake up,” she whispers into the dark.
Wake up.
Adeline curls into the forest ﬂoor, closes her eyes, and
sees her mother’s tearstained cheeks, her father’s hollow
sadness, Estele’s weary gaze. She sees the darkness,
smiling. Hears his voice as he whispers that single, binding
word.
Done.

64

New York City
March 10, 2014

XI
A Frisbee lands in the grass nearby.
Addie hears the rumble of running feet, and opens her
eyes in time to see a giant black nose rushing at her face
before the dog covers her in wet kisses. She laughs and sits
up, runs her ﬁngers through thick fur, catching the dog by
his collar before he can get ahold of the paper bag with the
second muﬃn.
“Hello, you,” she says as, across the park, someone calls
out an apology.
She ﬂings the Frisbee back in their direction, and the dog
is oﬀ again. Addie shivers, suddenly wide awake, and cold.
That’s the trouble with March—the warmth never lasts.
There’s that narrow stretch when it parades as spring, just
enough for you to thaw if you’re sitting in the sun, but then
it’s gone. The sun has moved on. The shadows have swept
in. Addie shivers again, and pushes up from the grass,
brushing oﬀ her leggings.
She should have stolen warmer pants.
Shoving the paper bag in her pocket, Addie tucks Fred’s
book under her arm and abandons the park, heading east
down Union and up toward the waterfront.
Halfway there, she stops at the sound of a violin, the
notes picked out like ripened fruit.

65

On the sidewalk, a woman perches on a stool, the
instrument tucked beneath her chin. The melody is sweet
and slow, drawing Addie back to Marseilles, to Budapest, to
Dublin.
A handful of people gather to listen, and when the song
ends, the sidewalk ﬁlls with soft applause, and passing
bodies. Addie digs the last change out of her pocket, and
drops it into the open case, and carries on, lighter, and
fuller.
When she reaches the theater in Cobble Hill, she checks
the posted timetable and then pushes open the door,
quickening her pace as she crosses the crowded lobby.
“Hey,” Addie says, ﬂagging down a teen boy with a
broom. “I think I left my purse in theater three.”
Lying is easy, so long as you choose the right words.
He waves her on without looking up, and she ducks
beneath the velvet ticket-taker’s rope and into the darkened
hall, the urgency falling away with every step. Muted
thunder rolls beneath the doors of an action ﬁlm. Music
seeps into the hall from a romantic comedy. The highs and
lows of voices, and scores. She ambles down the corridor,
studying the COMING SOON posters and the ticker tapes
announcing the showings above each door. She’s seen them
all a dozen times, but she doesn’t care.
The credits must be rolling on number ﬁve, because the
doors swing open, and a stream of people spill out into the
corridor. Addie ducks past them, into the emptying room,
and ﬁnds an overturned bucket of popcorn in the second
row, golden pebbles littering the sticky ﬂoor. She scoops it
up and marches back to the lobby, and the concession
stand, waits in line behind a trio of preteen girls before
reaching the counter, and the boy behind it.
She runs a hand through her hair, mussing it slightly, and
blows out her breath.

66

“I’m sorry,” she says, “some little boy kicked over my
popcorn.” She shakes her head, and so does he, a mimic,
echoing her exasperation. “Is there any way you could
charge me the reﬁll cost instead of…” She is already
reaching in her pocket, as if to pull out a wallet, but the boy
takes the bucket.
“Don’t worry about it,” he says, glancing around. “I’ve got
you.”
Addie beams. “You’re a star,” she says, meeting his eyes,
and the boy blushes ﬁercely, and stammers that it’s really
no problem, no problem at all, even as he scans the lobby
for a superior. He dumps out the rest of the spilled popcorn
and ﬁlls it fresh, passing it like a secret back across the
counter.
“Enjoy your show.”

Of all the inventions Addie has seen ushered into the world
—steam-powered trains, electric lights, photography, and
phones, and airplanes, and computers—movies might just
be her favorite one.
Books are wonderful, portable, lasting, but sitting there, in
the darkened theater, the wide screen ﬁlling her vision, the
world falls away, and for a few short hours she is someone
else, plunged into romance and intrigue and comedy and
adventure. All of it complete with 4K picture and stereo
sound.
A quiet heaviness ﬁlls her chest when the credits roll. For
a while she was weightless, but now she returns to herself,
sinking until her feet are back on the ground.
By the time Addie gets out of the theater it is almost six,
and the sun is going down.
She winds her way back through the tree-lined streets,
past the park, the market now shuttered and the stalls
67

already gone, and toward the rusted green table at the
other edge. Fred is still sitting there in his chair, reading M.
The pattern of spines on the table has shifted a little, an
empty space here where a book has sold, a new rise there
where another has been added. The light is getting low, and
soon he’ll have to go in, pack up the boxes and carry them
one by one back into the house, and up the two ﬂoors to his
one-bedroom. Addie has oﬀered many times to help, but
Fred insists on doing it himself. Another echo of Estele.
Stubborn as stale bread.
Addie crouches down beside the table, and rises with the
borrowed book in hand, as if it had simply fallen oﬀ the end.
She sets it back, careful not to upset the stack, and Fred
must be at a good spot in the story, because he grunts
without ever looking up at her, or the book, or the paper
bag she sets on top, the one with the chocolate-chip muﬃn
inside.
It’s the only kind he likes.
Candace always gave him hell for his sweet tooth, he told
Addie one morning, said it would kill him, but life’s a bitch
with a crooked sense of humor—’cause she’s gone, and he’s
still eating shit (his words, not hers).
The temperature is falling, and Addie tucks her hands in
her pockets and wishes Fred a good night before continuing
down the block, her back to the low sun and her shadow
long ahead.

It’s dark by the time Addie gets to the Alloway—one of those
places that seems to relish its status as a dive bar, a
reputation tarnished by the fact it’s become a favorite
among headliners who want that Brooklyn feel. A handful of
people mill around on the curb, smoking, chatting, waiting
for friends, and Addie lingers among them a moment. She
68

bums a cigarette, just to have something to do, resisting the
easy draw of the door for as long as she can, that tipping
sense of the familiar, déjà vu.
She knows this road.
Knows where it leads.
Inside, the Alloway is shaped like a bottle of whisky, the
narrow stem of the entry, the dark wooden bar widening to
a room of tables and chairs. She takes a seat at the counter.
The man on her left buys her a drink, and she lets him.
“Let me guess,” says the man. “A rosé?”
And she thinks of ordering whisky just to see the surprise
on his face, but that was never her drink; she’s always gone
for sweet.
“Champagne.”
He orders, and they make small talk until he gets a call,
and steps away, promising to be right back. She knows he
won’t, is grateful for it as she sips her drink and waits for
Toby to go onstage.
He takes a seat, one knee up to steady his guitar, and
ﬂashes that bashful smile, almost apologetic. He hasn’t
learned yet how to take up space, but she’s sure he will. He
looks out at the small crowd before he starts to play, and
Addie closes her eyes and lets herself vanish into the music.
He plays a few covers. One of his own folk tunes. And then,
this.
The ﬁrst chords ﬂoat through the Alloway, and Addie is
back in his place. She is sitting at the piano, coaxing out
notes, and he is there, beside her, ﬁngers folded over hers.
It is coming together now, words wrapped over melody. It
is becoming his. It is like a tree, taking root. He will
remember, on his own; not her, of course—not her, but this.
Their song.
It ends, the music replaced by applause, and Toby sidles
up to the bar, orders a Jack and Coke because they’ll give it

69

to him for free, and somewhere between the ﬁrst sip and
the third he sees her, and smiles, and for an instant Addie
thinks—hopes, even now—that he remembers something,
because he looks at her as if he knows her, but the truth is
simply that he wants to; attraction can look an awful lot like
recognition in the wrong light.
“Sorry,” Toby says, head ducking the way it does
whenever he’s embarrassed. The way it did that morning
when he found her in his living room.
Someone brushes Addie’s shoulder as they reach past her
for the bar door. She blinks, and the dream falls away.
She has not gone in. She is still standing on the street,
the cigarette burned away to nothing between her ﬁngers.
A man holds open the door. “You coming in?”
Addie shakes her head, and forces herself to step back,
away from the door, and the bar, and the boy about to take
the stage. “Not tonight,” she says.
The rise isn’t worth the fall.

70

New York City
March 10, 2014

XII
Night settles over Addie as she crosses the Brooklyn Bridge.
The promise of spring has retreated like a tide, replaced
again by a damp winter chill, and she pulls her jacket close,
breath fogging as she starts the long stretch up the length
of Manhattan.
It would be easy enough to take the subway, but Addie
has never liked being underground, where the air is close
and stale, the tunnels too much like tombs. Being trapped,
buried alive, these are the things that scare you when you
cannot die. Besides, she doesn’t mind walking, knows the
strength of her own limbs, relishes the kind of tired she used
to dread.
Still, it’s late, and her cheeks are numb, her legs weary,
by the time she reaches the Baxter on Fifty-sixth.
A man in a trim gray coat holds the door, and her skin
tingles at the sudden ﬂush of central heat as she steps into
the Baxter’s marble lobby. She is already dreaming of a hot
shower and a soft bed, already moving toward the open
elevator, when the man behind the desk rises from his seat.
“Good evening,” he says. “Can I help you?”
“I’m here to see James,” she says, without slowing.
“Twenty-third ﬂoor.”
The man frowns. “He isn’t in.”
“Even better,” she says, stepping into the elevator.

71

“Ma’am,” he calls, starting after her, “you can’t just—”
but the doors are already closing. He knows he will not
make it, is already turning back toward the desk, reaching
for the phone to call security, and that is the last thing she
sees before the doors slide shut between them. Perhaps he
will get the phone to his ear, even begin to dial before the
thought slips from his mind, and then he will look down at
the receiver in his hand and wonder what he was thinking,
apologize profusely to the voice on the line before sinking
back into his seat.

The apartment belongs to James St. Clair.
They had met at a coﬀee shop downtown a couple
months ago. The seats were all taken when he came over,
wisps of blond escaping the hem of a winter hat, glasses
fogging from the cold. That day Addie was Rebecca, and
before he’d even introduced himself, James had asked if he
could share her table, saw that she was reading Colette’s
Chéri, and managed a few lines of broken, blushing French.
He sat, and soon easy smiles gave way to easy
conversation. Funny, how some people take an age to
warm, and others simply walk into every room as if it’s
home.
James was like that, instantly likable.
When he asked, she said that she was a poet (an easy lie,
as no one ever asked for proof), and he told her he was
between jobs, and she nursed her coﬀee for as long as she
could, but eventually her cup was empty, and so was his,
and new customers were circling, buzzard-like, in search of
chairs, but when he began to rise, she’d felt that old familiar
sadness. And then James asked if she liked ice cream, and
even though it was January, the ground outside slicked with

72

ice and paving salt, Addie said she did, and this time when
they stood, they stood together.
Now she types the six-digit code into the keypad on his
door and steps inside.
The lights come on, revealing pale wood ﬂoors, and clean
marble counters, lush curtains and furniture that still looks
unused. A high-backed chair. A cream sofa. A table neatly
stacked with books.
She unzips her boots, steps out of them beside the door,
and pads barefoot through the apartment, tossing her jacket
over the arm of a chair. In the kitchen, she pours herself a
glass of merlot, ﬁnds a block of Gruyère in a fridge drawer
and a box of gourmet crackers in the cupboard, carries her
makeshift picnic into the living room, the city unfolding
beyond the ﬂoor-to-ceiling windows.
Addie sifts through his records, puts on a pressing of Billie
Holiday, and retreats to the cream sofa, knees tucked up
beneath her as she eats.
She would love a place like this. A place of her own. A bed
molded to her body. A wardrobe full of clothes. A home,
decorated with markers of the life she’s lived, the material
evidence of memory. But she cannot seem to hold on to
anything for long.
It is not as though she hasn’t tried.
Over the years, she’s collected books, hoarded art,
hidden ﬁne dresses away in chests and locked them there.
But no matter what she does, things always go missing.
They vanish, one by one, or all at once, stolen by some
strange circumstance, or simply time. Only in New Orleans
did she have a home, and even that was not hers, but
theirs, and it is gone.
The only thing she cannot seem to rid herself of is the
ring.

73

There was a time when she couldn’t bear to part with it
again. A time when she mourned its loss. A time when her
heart soared to hold it, so many decades later.
Now, she cannot stand the sight of it. It is an unwelcome
weight in her pocket, an unwanted reminder of another loss.
And every time her ﬁngers skim the wood, she feels the
darkness kissing her knuckle as he slides the band back on.
See? Now we are even.
Addie shudders, upsetting her glass, and drops of red
wine splash over the rim, landing like blood on the cream
sofa. She does not curse, does not spring to her feet to fetch
club soda and a towel. She simply watches as the stain
soaks in, and through, and disappears. As if it was never
there.
As if she was never there.
Addie rises, and goes to run herself a bath, soaks away
the city grime with scented oil, scrubs herself clean with
hundred-dollar soap.
When everything slips through your ﬁngers, you learn to
savor the feel of nice things against your palm.
She settles back into the tub, and sighs, breathing in a
mist of lavender and mint.
They went for ice cream that day, she and James, ate it
inside the shop, heads bowed together as they stole
toppings from each other’s cups. His hat sat discarded on
the table, his blond curls on full display, and he was striking,
yes, but it still took her a while to notice the looks.
Addie was used to passing glances—her features are
sharp, but feminine, her eyes bright above the constellation
of freckles on her cheeks, a kind of timeless beauty, she’s
been told—but this was diﬀerent. Heads were turning. Gazes
lingered. And when she wondered why, he looked at her
with such cheerful surprise, and confessed that he was, in
fact, an actor—in a show that was currently quite popular.

74

He blushed when he said it, looked away, then back to study
her face, as if braced for some fundamental change. But
Addie has never seen his work, and even if she had, she is
not one to blush at fame. She has lived too long, and known
too many artists. And even still, or perhaps more to the
point, Addie prefers the ones who aren’t yet ﬁnished, the
ones still looking for their shape.
And so James and Addie carried on.
She teased him about his loafers, his sweater, his wireframe glasses.
He told her he was born in the wrong decade.
She told him she was born in the wrong century.
He laughed, and she didn’t, but there was something oldfashioned in his manner. Only twenty-six, but when he
talked, he had the easy cadence, the slow precision, of a
man who knew the weight of his own voice, belonged to the
class of young men who dressed like their fathers, the
charade of those too eager to grow old.
Hollywood had seen it, too. He kept getting cast in period
pieces.
“I’ve got a face for sepia,” he joked.
Addie smiled. “Better than a face for radio.”
It was a lovely face, but there was something wrong, the
too-steady smile of a man with a secret. They made it
through the ice cream before he came undone. That easy
joy of his ﬂickered, and went out, and he dropped the plastic
spoon down into the cup and closed his eyes, and said, “I’m
sorry.”
“What for?” she asked, and he ﬂung himself back in his
seat, and ran his ﬁngers through his hair. To the strangers
on the street it might have looked like such a careless
gesture, a feline stretch, but she could see the anguish in
his face as he said it.
“You are so beautiful, and kind, and fun.”

75

“But?” she pressed, sensing the turn.
“I’m gay.”
The word, like a hitch in his throat, as he explained that
there was so much pressure, that he hated the gaze of the
media and all its demands. That people were beginning to
whisper, to wonder, and he wasn’t ready for them to know.
Addie realized, then, that they were on a stage. Propped
before the plate-glass windows of the ice-cream shop, for
everyone to see, and James was still apologizing, saying
that he shouldn’t have ﬂirted, shouldn’t have used her in
this way, but she wasn’t really listening. His blue eyes went
somewhat glassy as he spoke, and she wondered if this was
what he called on when the script ordered tears. If this was
the place he went. Addie has secrets, too, of course, though
she cannot help but keep them.
Still, she knows what it’s like, to have a truth erased.
“I understand,” he was saying, “if you want to go.”
But Addie didn’t stand up, didn’t reach for her coat. She
simply leaned in, and stole a blueberry from the edge of his
bowl.
“I don’t know about you,” she said lightly, “but I’m having
a lovely day.”
James let out a shaky breath, blinking away tears, and
smiled.
“So am I,” he said, and things were better after that.
It is so much easier to share a secret than to keep one,
and when they stepped outside again, hand in hand, they
were conspirators, made giddy by their private knowledge.
She was not worried about being noticed, being seen, knew
that if there were photos, they would never turn out.
(There were photos, but her face was always conveniently
in motion or obscured, and she remained a mystery girl in
the tabloids for the next week, until the headlines inevitably
moved on to juicier fare.)

76

They had come back here, to his apartment at the Baxter,
for a drink. His tables were covered in a ﬂurry of books and
papers, all relating to the Second World War. He was
preparing for a role, he told her, reading every ﬁrsthand
account he could ﬁnd. He showed them to her, these printed
reproductions, and Addie said that she’d been fascinated by
the war, that she knew a few stories, told them as if they
were someone else’s, a stranger’s experience instead of her
own. James listened, folded into the corner of the cream
sofa, his eyes pressed shut and a glass of whisky balanced
on his chest as she spoke.
They fell asleep side by side in the king-sized bed, in the
shadow of each other’s warmth, and the next morning,
Addie woke before dawn and slipped away, sparing them
both the discomfort of a good-bye.
She has the sense that they would have been friends. If
he’d remembered. She tries not to think about that—she
swears sometimes her memory runs forward as well as
back, unspooling to show the roads she’ll never get to
travel. But that way lies madness, and she has learned not
to follow.
Now she is back here, but he is not.
Addie wraps herself in one of James’s plush terry robes,
and throws open the French doors, stepping out onto the
bedroom balcony. The wind is up, the cold stinging the soles
of her bare feet. The city sprawls around her like a low night
sky, full of artiﬁcial stars, and she shoves her hands into the
pockets of the robe, and feels it, resting on the bottom of
the empty fold.
A small circle of smooth wood.
She sighs, closes her hand around the ring, and draws it
out, leans her elbows on the balcony, and forces herself to
look at the band in her open palm, to study it, as if she has
not already memorized every warp and whorl. She traces

77

the curve with her free hand, resists the urge to slip the
band onto her ﬁnger. She has thought of it, of course, in
darker moments, tired moments, but she will not be the one
to break.
She tips her hand, and lets the ring fall over the edge of
the balcony, down, down, into the dark.
Back inside, Addie pours herself another glass of wine and
climbs into the magniﬁcent bed, folds herself beneath the
down duvet and between the Egyptian sheets, and wishes
she’d gone into the Alloway, wishes that she’d sat at the bar
and waited for Toby, with his messy curls and shy smile.
Toby, who smells of honey, and plays bodies like
instruments, and takes up so much space in bed.

78

Villon-sur-Sarthe, France
July 30, 1714

XIII
A hand shakes Adeline awake.
For a moment, she is out of place, out of time. Sleep
clings to her edges, and with it, the dream—it must have
been a dream—of prayers made to silent gods, of deals
made in the dark, of being forgotten.
Her imagination has always been a vivid thing.
“Wake up,” says a voice, one she has known all her life.
The hand again, ﬁrm on her shoulder, and she blinks
away the last of sleep to ﬁnd the wooden planks of a barn
ceiling, straw pricking her skin, and Isabelle kneeling beside
her, blond hair braided into a crown, brows drawn tight with
worry. Her face has waned a little with every child, each
birth stealing a little more of her life.
“Get up, you fool.”
That is what Isabelle should say, the chiding softened by
the kindness in her voice. But her lips are pursed with worry,
her forehead furrowed with concern. She has always
frowned like that, fully, with her whole face, but when
Adeline reaches out to press one thumb into the space
between the other girl’s brows (to smooth away the worry,
the way she has a thousand times before) Isabelle draws
back, away from the touch of a stranger.
Not a dream, then.

79

“Mathieu,” Isabelle calls over her shoulder, and Adeline
sees her oldest son standing in the barn’s open doorway,
clutching a pail. “Go and get a blanket.”
The boy vanishes into the sun.
“Who are you?” asks Isabelle, and Adeline starts to
answer, forgetting that the name won’t come. It lodges in
her throat.
“What happened to you?” presses Isabelle. “Are you
lost?”
Adeline nods.
“Where did you come from?”
“Here.”
Isabelle’s frown deepens. “Villon? But that’s not possible.
We would have met. I’ve lived here all my life.”
“So have I,” she murmurs, and Isabelle must see the truth
as a delusion, because she shakes her head as if clearing
away a thought.
“That boy,” she mutters, “where has he gone?”
She turns her gaze fully back to Adeline. “Can you
stand?”
Arm in arm, they walk into the yard. Adeline is ﬁlthy, but
Isabelle doesn’t let go, and her throat tightens at the simple
kindness, the warmth of the other girl’s touch. Isabelle
treats her like a wild thing, her voice soft, her motions slow
as she leads Adeline to the house.
“Are you hurt?”
Yes, she thinks. But she knows Isabelle is speaking of
scrapes and cuts and simple wounds, and of those, she is
less certain. She looks down at herself. In the darkness, the
worst was hidden. In the light of morning, it’s on display.
Adeline’s dress, spoiled. Her slippers, ruined. Her skin,
painted with the forest ﬂoor. She felt the scratch and tear of
brambles in the woods last night, but she can ﬁnd no angry
welts, no cuts, no signs of blood.

80

“No,” she says softly, as they step inside the house.
There is no sign of Mathieu, or Henri, their second child—
just the baby, Sara, sleeping in a basket by the hearth.
Isabelle sits Adeline in a chair across from the infant, and
sets a pot of water over the ﬁre.
“You’re being so kind,” Adeline whispers.
“‘I was a stranger and you welcomed me,’” says Isabelle.
It is a Bible verse.
She brings a basin to the table, along with a cloth.
Kneeling at Adeline’s feet, she coaxes the dirty slippers oﬀ,
sets them by the hearth, then takes Adeline’s hands and
begins to clean the forest ﬂoor from her ﬁngers, the soil
from beneath her nails.
As she works, Isabelle peppers her with questions, and
Adeline tries to answer, she really does, but her name is still
a shape she cannot say, and when she speaks of her life in
the village, of the shadow in the woods, of the deal she
made, the words make it across her lips, but stop before
they reach the other girl’s ears. Isabelle’s face goes blank,
her gaze ﬂat, and when Adeline ﬁnally trails oﬀ, she gives
her head a quick shake, as if throwing oﬀ a daydream.
“Sorry,” says her oldest friend, with an apologetic smile.
“What were you saying?”
She will learn in time that she can lie, and the words will
ﬂow like wine, easily poured, easily swallowed. But the truth
will always stop at the end of her tongue. Her story silenced
for all but herself.
A mug is pressed into Adeline’s hands as the infant
begins to fuss.
“It is an hour’s ride to the nearest village,” Isabelle says,
lifting the swaddled child. “Did you walk all this way? You
must have…” She is speaking to Adeline, of course, but her
voice is soft, sweet, her attention on Sara, breathing into the
soft down of the baby’s hair, and Adeline must admit, her

81

friend was seemingly made to be a mother—too content to
even notice the attention.
“What will we do with you?” she coos.
Footsteps sound on the path outside, heavy and booted,
and Isabelle straightens a little, patting the infant’s back.
“That will be my husband, George.”
Adeline knows George well, had kissed him once when
they were six, back when kisses were traded like pieces in a
game. But now her heart ﬂutters with panic, and she is
already on her feet, the cup clattering to the table.
It is not George she fears.
It is the doorway, and what happens when Isabelle is on
the other side.
She catches Isabelle’s arm, her grip sudden and tight, and
for the ﬁrst time, fear ﬂits across the other woman’s face.
But then she steadies, and pats Adeline’s hand.
“Don’t worry,” she says. “I’ll talk to him. It will all be
well.” And before Adeline can refuse, the infant is pressed
into her arms, and Isabelle is out of reach.
“Wait. Please.”
Fear beats inside her chest, but Isabelle is gone. The door
stays open, voices rising and falling in the yard beyond, the
words themselves reduced to windsong. The infant murmurs
in her arms and she sways a little, trying to soothe the child,
and herself. The baby quiets, and she’s just returning her to
the basket when she hears a short gasp.
“Get away from her.”
It is Isabelle, her voice high and tight with panic. “Who let
you in?”
All the Christian kindness, erased in an instant by a
mother’s fear.
“You did,” says Adeline, and she has to ﬁght the urge to
laugh. There is no humor in the moment, only madness.

82

Isabelle stares in horror. “You’re lying,” she says, surging
forward, halted only by her husband’s hand upon her
shoulder. He has seen Adeline, too, marked her as a
diﬀerent kind of wild thing, a wolf inside their house.
“I meant no harm,” she says.
“Then go,” orders George.
And what else can she do? She abandons the baby,
leaves behind the mug of broth, the basin on the table, and
her oldest friend. She hurries out into the yard and glances
back, sees Isabelle press her daughter to her chest before
George blocks the doorway, ax in hand as if she is a tree to
fell, a shadow set upon their house.
And then he too is gone, and the door is shut and bolted.
Adeline stands on the path, uncertain what to do, where
to go. There are grooves in her mind, worn smooth and
deep. Her legs have carried her to and from this place too
many times. Her body knows the way. Go down this road,
and take a left, and there is her own house, which is not her
home anymore, even though her feet are already moving
toward it.
Her feet—Adeline shakes her head. She left her slippers
by Isabelle’s hearth to dry.
A pair of George’s boots lean against the wall beside the
door, and she takes them and begins to walk. Not to the
house she grew up in, but back to the river where her
prayers began.
The day is already warm, the air edged with heat as she
drops the boots onto the bank and steps out into the
shallow stream.
Her breath catches with the cold as the river laps up
around her calves, kisses the backs of her knees. She looks
down, seeking out her warped reﬂection and half expects
not to ﬁnd it there, to see only the sky behind her head. But
she is still there, distorted by the stream.

83

Hair once braided, now wild, sharp eyes wide. Seven
freckles like ﬂecks of paint across her skin. A face drawn in
fear, and anger.
“Why didn’t you answer?” she hisses to the sunlight on
the stream.
But the river only laughs, in its soft, slippery way, the
burble of water over stone.
She wrestles with the laces of her wedding dress, peels
the soiled thing away, plunges it down into the water. The
current drags at the fabric, and her ﬁngers long to let go, to
let the river claim this last vestige of her life, but she has
too little now to give up more.
Adeline plunges herself in, too, freeing the last ﬂowers
from her hair, rinsing the woods from her skin. She comes
up feeling cold, and brittle, and new.
The sun is high, the day hot, and she lays the dress out in
the grass to dry, sinks onto the slope beside it in her shift.
They sit, side by side in silence, one a ghost of the other.
And she realizes, looking down, that this is all she has.
A dress. A slip. A pair of stolen shoes.
Restless, she takes up a stick and begins to draw absent
patterns in the silt along the bank. But every stroke she
makes dissolves, the change too quick to be the river’s
doing. She draws a line, watches it begin to wash away
before she even ﬁnishes the mark. Tries to write her name,
but her hand stills, pinned under the same rock that held
her tongue. She carves a deeper line, gouges out the sand,
but it makes no diﬀerence, soon that groove is gone, too,
and an angry sob escapes her throat as she casts the stick
away.
Tears prick her eyes as she hears the shuﬄe of small feet,
blinks to ﬁnd a round-faced boy standing over her. Isabelle’s
four-year-old son. Addie used to swing him in her arms, spin
until they both were dizzy and laughing.

84

“Hello,” says the boy.
“Hello,” she says, her voice a little shaky.
“Henri!” calls the boy’s mother, and in a moment Isabelle
is there, on the rise, a basket of washing on her hip. She
sees Adeline sitting in the grass, holds out a hand not for
her friend, but for her son. “Come here,” she orders, those
blue eyes lingering on Adeline.
“Who are you?” asks Isabelle, and she feels as if she’s at
the edge of a steep hill, the ground plunging away beneath
her feet. Her balance, tipping forward, as the dreaded
descent begins again.
“Are you lost?”
Déjà vu. Déjà su. Déjà vécu.
Already seen. Already known. Already lived.
They have been here before, walked this road, or
something like it, and so Adeline now knows where to put
her feet, knows what to say, which words will draw out
kindness, knows that if she asks in the right way, Isabelle
will take her home, and wrap a blanket around her
shoulders, and oﬀer her a cup of broth, and it will work until
it doesn’t.
“No,” she says. “I’m just passing through.”
It is the wrong thing to say, and Isabelle’s expression
hardens.
“It is not ﬁtting for a woman to travel alone. And certainly
not in such a state.”
“I know,” she says. “I had more, but I was robbed.”
Isabelle blanches. “By who?”
“A stranger in the woods,” she says, and it is not a lie.
“Are you hurt?”
Yes, she thinks. Grievously. But she forces herself to
shake her head and answer, “I will live.”
She has no choice.
The other woman sets the washing down.

85

“Wait here,” says Isabelle, the kind and generous Isabelle
again. “I will come right back.”
She swings her young son up in her arms, and turns back
toward her house, and the moment she is out of sight,
Adeline gathers her dress, still damp at the hem, and pulls it
on.
Isabelle will, of course, forget again.
She’ll get halfway to her house before she slows and
wonders why she started back without her clothes. She’ll
blame her tired mind, addled from three children, the
infant’s distemper, and return to the river. And this time,
there will be no woman sitting on the banks, no dress
spread in the sun, only a stick, abandoned in the grass, a
canvas of silt laid smooth.

Adeline has drawn her family house a hundred times.
Memorized the angle of the roof, the texture of the door,
the shadow of her father’s workshop, and the limbs of the
old yew tree that sits like a sentinel at the edge of the yard.
That is where she’s standing now, tucked behind the
trunk, watching Maxime graze beside the barn, watching
her mother hang linens out to dry, watching her father
whittle down a block of wood.
And as Adeline watches, she realizes she cannot stay.
Or rather, she could—could ﬁnd a way to skip from house
to house, like stones skating across the river—but she will
not. Because when she thinks of it, she feels neither like the
river nor the stone, but like a hand, as it tires of throwing.
There is Estele, closing her door.
There is Isabelle, one moment kind, and the next ﬁlled
with horror.
Later, much later, Addie will make a game of these
cycles, will see how long she can step from perch to perch
86

before she falls. But right now, the pain is too fresh, too
sharp, and she cannot fathom going through those motions,
cannot weather the weary look on her father’s face, the
rebuke in Estele’s eyes. Adeline LaRue cannot be a stranger
here, to these people she has always known.
It hurts too much, watching them forget her.
Her mother slips back inside the house, and Adeline
abandons the shelter of the tree and starts across the yard;
not for the front door, but for her father’s shop.
There is a single shuttered window, an unlit lamp, the
only light a stripe of sun spilling through the open door, but
that is enough to see by. She knows the contours of this
place by heart. The air smells like sap, earthy and sweet,
the ﬂoor is covered in shavings and dust, and every surface
holds the bounty of her father’s work. A wooden horse,
modeled from Maxime, of course—but here no bigger than a
cat. A set of bowls, decorated only by the rings of the trunk
from which they were cut. A collection of palm-sized birds,
their wings spread, or folded, or stretched mid-ﬂight.
Adeline learned to sketch the world in charcoal and
pressed lead, but her father has always created with a knife;
whittled the shapes out of nothing, giving them breadth,
and depth, and life.
She reaches out now, and runs her ﬁnger down the
horse’s nose, the way she has a hundred times before.
What is she doing here?
Adeline does not know.
Saying good-bye, perhaps, to her father—her favorite
person in this world.
This is how she would remember him. Not by the sad
unknowing in his eyes, or the grim set of his jaw as he led
her to church, but by the things he loved. By the way he
showed her how to hold a stick of charcoal, coaxing shapes
and shades with the weight of her hand. The songs and

87

stories, the sights from the ﬁve summers she went with him
to market, when Adeline was old enough to travel, but not
old enough to cause a stir. By the careful gift of a wooden
ring, made for his ﬁrst and only daughter when she was
born—the one she then oﬀered to the dark.
Even now, her hand drifts to her throat to thumb the
leather cord, and something deep inside her cringes when
she remembers it is gone forever.
Scraps of parchment scatter the table, covered in
drawings and dimensions, the markings of past and future
work. A pencil sits on the edge of the desk, and Adeline
ﬁnds herself reaching for it, even as a dread echo sounds
inside her chest.
She brings it to the page, and begins to write.
Cher Papa—
But as the pencil scratches across the paper, the letters
fade in its wake. By the time Adeline has ﬁnished those two,
unsteady words, they are gone, and when she slams her
hand down on the table, she upsets a tiny pot of varnish,
spilling the precious oil onto her father’s notes, the wood
beneath. She scrambles to collect the papers, staining her
hands and knocking over one of the little wooden birds.
But there is no need for panic.
The varnish is already soaking through, sinking in and
down like a rock in a river, until it’s gone. It is such a
strange thing, to make sense of this moment, to count what
has and hasn’t been lost.
The varnish is gone, but not back into the pot, which lies
empty on its side, the contents lost. The parchment lies
unmarked, untouched, as is the table beneath. Only her
hands are stained, the oil tracing the whorls of her ﬁngers,
the lines of her palms. She is still staring at them when she
steps back, and hears the terrible snap of wood splitting
beneath her heel.

88

It is the little wooden bird, one of its wings splintered on
the packed-earth ﬂoor. Adeline winces in sympathy—it was
her favorite of the ﬂock, frozen in a moment of upward
motion, the ﬁrst rise of ﬂight.
She crouches to gather it up, but by the time she
straightens, the splinters on the ground are gone, and in her
hand, the little wooden bird is whole again. She nearly drops
it in surprise, doesn’t know why this is the thing that seems
impossible. She has been made a stranger, has seen herself
slide from the minds of those she’s known and loved like the
sun behind a cloud, has watched every mark she tries to
make as it’s undone, erased.
But the bird is diﬀerent.
Perhaps because she can hold it in her hands. Perhaps
because, for an instant, it seems a blessing, this undoing of
an accident, a righting of a wrong, and not simply an
extension of her own erasure. The inability to leave a mark.
But Adeline doesn’t think of it that way, not yet, has not
spent months turning the curse over in her hands,
memorizing its shape, studying the smooth surfaces in
search of cracks.
In this moment, she simply clutches the small, unbroken
bird, grateful that it’s safe.
She is about to return the ﬁgure to its ﬂock when
something stops her—perhaps the oddness of the moment,
perhaps the fact that she is already missing this life, even if
it will never miss her—but she tucks the bird into the pocket
of her skirts, and forces herself out of the shed, and away
from her home.
Down the road, and past the twisted yew tree, and around
the bend, until she has reached the edge of town. Only then
does she let herself look back, let her gaze drift one last
time to the line of trees across the ﬁeld, the dense shadow
stretched beneath the sun, before she turns her back on the

89

forest, and the village of Villon, and the life that is no longer
hers, and begins to walk.

90

Villon-sur-Sarthe, France
July 30, 1714

XIV
Villon vanishes like a cart around a bend, the rooftops
swallowed up by the trees and the hills of the surrounding
country. By the time Adeline musters the courage to look
back, it is gone.
She sighs, and turns, and walks, wincing at the strange
shape of George’s boots.
They are too large by half. Adeline found socks on a
washing line, shoved them into the toes of the shoes to
make them ﬁt, but by the fourth hour of walking she can
feel the places where her skin has rubbed raw, the blood
pooling in the leather soles. She is afraid to look, and so she
doesn’t, focuses only on the path ahead.
She has decided to walk toward the walled city of Le
Mans. It is the farthest she has ever gone, and even still,
she has never made the trip alone.
She knows the world is so much larger than the towns
along the Sarthe, but right now she cannot think beyond the
road in front of her. Every step she takes is a step away from
Villon, away from a life that is no longer hers.
You wanted to be free, says a voice in her head, but it is
not hers; no, it is deeper, smoother, lined with satin and
woodsmoke.
She skirts the villages, the farms alone in their ﬁelds.
There are whole stretches when the world seems to empty

91

around her. As if an artist drew the barest lines of the
landscape, then turned, distracted, from the task.
Once, Adeline hears a cart trundling down the road, and
ducks into the shade of a nearby grove and waits for it to
pass. She does not want to stray too far from the road, or
the river, but over her shoulder, through a copse of trees,
she sees the yellow blush of summer fruit, and her stomach
aches with longing.
An orchard.
The shade is lovely, the air cool, and she picks a ripened
peach from a low branch and sinks her teeth greedily into
the fruit, her empty stomach cramping around the sugared
bite. Despite the pain, she eats a pear as well, and a handful
of mirabelles, scoops palm and after palm of water from a
well at the orchard’s edge, before forcing herself forward,
out of the shelter and back into the summer heat.
The shadows are stretching long when she ﬁnally sinks
onto the riverbank and pulls oﬀ the boots to assess the
damage to her feet.
But there is none.
The socks are unbloody. Her heels, uncut. No sign of the
miles walked, the wear and tear of so many hours on the
packed-earth road, though she felt the pain of every step.
Nor are her shoulders burned from the sun, though all day
she felt its heat. Her stomach twists, aching for something
more than stolen fruit, but as the light ebbs, and the hills
darken, there are no lanterns, no homes in sight.
Exhausted, she would curl up right there on the river’s
edge and give in to sleep, but insects ﬂoat above the water,
nipping at her skin, and so she retreats into an open ﬁeld,
and sinks down amid the tall grass the way she did so many
times when she was young, and wanted to be somewhere
else. The grass would swallow the house, the workshop, the

92

rooftops of Villon, everything except the open sky overhead,
a sky that could belong to anywhere.
Now, as she stares up at the mottled dusk, she longs for
home. Not for Roger, or the future she did not want, but the
woody grip of Estele’s hand on hers as the old woman
showed her how to wind raspberry bushes, and the soft hum
of her father’s voice as he worked in his shed, the scent of
sap and wood dust in the air. The pieces of her life she
never meant to lose.
She slips her hand into the pocket of her skirt, ﬁngers
searching for the little carved bird. She has not let herself
reach for it before, half-sure it would be gone, its theft
undone like every other act—but it is still there, the wood
smooth and warm.
Adeline draws it out, holds it up against the sky, and
wonders.
She could not break the ﬁgurine.
But she could take it.
Amid the growing list of negatives—she cannot write,
cannot say her name, cannot leave a mark—this is the ﬁrst
thing she has been able to do. She can steal. It will be a long
time before she knows the contours of her curse, longer still
before she understands the shadow’s sense of humor,
before he looks at her over a glass of wine and observes
that a successful theft is an anonymous act. The absence of
a mark.
In this moment, she is simply grateful for the talisman.
My name is Adeline LaRue, she tells herself, clutching the
little wooden bird. I was born in Villon in the year 1691, to
Jean and Marthe, in a stone house just beyond the old yew
tree …
She tells the story of her life to the little carving, as if
afraid she’ll forget herself as easily as others do, unaware

93

that her mind is now a ﬂawless cage, her memory a perfect
trap. She will never forget, though she’ll wish she could.
As the night creeps through, purple giving way to black,
Adeline looks up into the dark, and begins to suspect that
the dark is staring back, that god, or demon, with its cruel
gaze, its mocking smile, features contorted in a way she
never drew.
As she stares, head craned, the stars seem to pick out the
lines of a face, the cheekbones and brow, the illusion
drawing together until she half expects the blanket of night
to ripple and twist as the shadows did in the woods, the
space between stars splitting to reveal those emerald eyes.
She bites her tongue to keep from calling to him, lest
something else decide to answer.
She is not in Villon, after all. She does not know which
gods might linger here.
Later, her strength will falter.
Later, there will be nights when her need will smother
caution, and she will scream and curse and dare him to
come out and face her.
Later—but tonight she is tired, and hungry, and loath to
waste what little energy she has on gods that will not
answer.
So she curls onto her side, squeezes her eyes shut, and
waits for sleep, and as she does, she thinks of torches in the
ﬁeld beyond the woods, of voices calling her name.
Adeline, Adeline, Adeline.
The words pound against her, drumming on her skin like
rain.
She wakes sometime later with a start, the world inky
black and the downpour already soaking through her dress,
the rainstorm sudden and heavy.
She hurries, skirts dragging, across the ﬁeld to the
nearest line of trees. Back home she loved the patter of rain

94

against the walls of the house, used to lie awake and listen
to the world washed clean. But here she has no bed, no
shelter. She does her best to wring the water from the dress,
but it is already cooling on her skin, and she huddles among
the roots, shivering beneath the broken canopy.
My name is Adeline LaRue, she tells herself. My father
taught me how to be a dreamer, and my mother taught me
how to be a wife, and Estele taught me how to speak to
gods.
Her thoughts drag on Estele, who used to stand out in the
rain, palms open as if to catch the storm. Estele, who never
cared as much for the company of others as for her own.
Who probably would have been content to be alone in the
world.
She tries to imagine what the old woman would say, if she
could see her now, but every time she tries to summon
those keen eyes, that knowing mouth, she sees only the
way Estele looked at her in those last moments, the way her
face furrowed, and then cleared, a lifetime of knowing
brushed away like a tear.
No, she should not think of Estele.
Adeline wraps her arms around her knees, and tries to
sleep, and when she wakes again, sunlight is pouring
through the trees. A ﬁnch stands on the mossy ground
nearby, pecking at the hem of her dress. She brushes it
away, checking her pocket for the little wooden bird as she
stands, sways, dizzy with hunger, realizes she has not had
more than fruit in a day and a half.
My name is Adeline LaRue, she tells herself as she makes
her way back to the road. It is becoming a mantra,
something to pass the time, measure her steps, and she
repeats it, over and over.
She rounds a bend, and stops, blinking ﬁercely, as if the
sun is in her eyes. It’s not, and yet the world ahead has

95

been plunged into a sudden, vivid yellow, the green ﬁelds
devoured by a blanket the color of egg yolk.
She looks back over her shoulder, but the way behind her
is still green and brown, the ordinary shades of summer. The
ﬁeld ahead is mustard seed, though she doesn’t know it
then. Then, it is simply beautiful, in an overpowering way.
Addie stares, and for a moment she forgets her hunger, her
aching feet, her sudden loss, and marvels at the shocking
brightness, the all-consuming color.
She wades through the ﬁeld, ﬂower buds brushing her
palms, unafraid to crush the plants underfoot—they have
already straightened in her wake, steps erased. By the time
she reaches the far edge of the ﬁeld, and the path, and the
steady green, it looks dull, her eyes searching for another
source of wonder.
Shortly after, a larger town comes into sight, and she is
about to weave around it when she catches a scent on the
air that makes her stomach ache.
Butter, yeast, the sweet and hearty smell of bread.
She looks like a dress that fell from the line, wrinkled and
dirty, her hair a tangled nest, but she is too hungry to care.
She follows the scent between the houses, and up a narrow
lane toward the village square. Voices rise with the smell of
baking, and when she rounds the corner she sees a handful
of women sitting around a communal oven. They perch on
the stone bench around it, laughing and chatting like birds
on a branch as the loaves rise within the oven’s open
mouth. The sight of them is jarring, ordinary in an aching
way, and Adeline lingers in the shaded lane a moment,
listening to the trill and chirp of their voices, before the
hunger forces her forward.
She doesn’t have to search her pockets to know she has
no coins. Perhaps she could barter for the bread, but all she
has is the bird, and when she ﬁnds it in the folds of her skirt,

96

her ﬁngers refuse to loosen on the wood. She could beg, but
her mother’s face comes to mind, eyes tight with scorn.
That leaves only theft—which is wrong, of course, but she
is too hungry to weigh the sin of it. There is only the matter
of how. The oven is hardly unmanned, and despite how fast
she seems to fade from memory, she is still ﬂesh and blood,
not phantom. She cannot simply walk up and take the bread
without causing a stir. Sure, they might forget her soon
enough, but what danger would she be in before they did? If
she got to the bread, and then away, how far would she
have to run? How fast?
And then she hears it. A soft, animal sound, almost lost
beneath the chatter.
She circles the stone hut and ﬁnds her chance, across the
lane.
A mule stands in the shade, lazily chewing its bit beside a
sack of apples, a stack of kindling.
All it takes is a single, sharp smack, and the mule lurches,
more in shock, she hopes, than pain. It jostles forward,
upsetting the apples and the wood as it sets oﬀ. And just
like that, the square is startled, thrown into a brief but noisy
state as the beast trots away, dragging a bag of grain, and
the women leap to their feet, the trills and warbles of their
laughs dissolving into taut shouts of dismay.
Adeline slips across the oven like a cloud, swiping the
nearest loaf from the stone mouth. Pain sears across her
ﬁngers as she grabs it, and she nearly drops the bread, but
she is too hungry, and pain, she is learning, doesn’t last.
The loaf is hers, and by the time the mule is settled, and the
grain set right, and the apples gathered, and the women
returned to their place by the oven, she is already gone.
She leans in the shade of a stable on the edge of town,
teeth tearing into the under-baked bread. The dough
collapses in her mouth, heavy, sweet, and hard to swallow,

97

but she doesn’t care. It is ﬁlling enough, wearing the edges
oﬀ her hunger. Her mind begins to clear. Her chest loosens,
and for the ﬁrst time since she left Villon, she feels
something like human, if not whole. She pushes oﬀ the
stable wall and begins to walk again, following the line of
the sun, and the path of the river, toward Le Mans.
My name is Adeline … she starts again, then stops.
She never loved the name, and now she cannot even say
it. Whatever she calls herself, it will be only in her head.
Adeline is the woman she left in Villon, on the eve of a
wedding she did not want. But Addie—Addie was a gift from
Estele, shorter, sharper, the switch-quick name for the girl
who rode to markets, and strained to see over roofs, for the
one who drew and dreamed of bigger stories, grander
worlds, of lives ﬁlled with adventure.
And so, as she walks on, she starts the story over in her
head.
My name is Addie LaRue …

98

New York City
March 11, 2014

XV
It is too quiet without James.
Addie never thought of him as loud—charming, cheerful,
but hardly raucous—but now she realizes how much he ﬁlled
this space when they were in it.
That night, he put on a record and sang along as he made
grilled cheese on the six-burner stove, which they ate
standing up because the place was new, and he hadn’t
bought kitchen chairs. There are still no kitchen chairs, but
now there is no James, either—he’s oﬀ on location
somewhere—and the apartment stretches out around her,
too silent and too large for one person, the high ﬂoor and
the double-paned glass combining to block out the sounds
of the city, reducing Manhattan to a picture, still and gray,
beyond the windows.
Addie plays record after record, but the sound only
echoes. She tries to watch TV, but the drone of news is more
static than anything, as is the tinny choir of voices on the
radio, too far away to feel real.
The sky outside is a static gray, a thin mist of rain blurring
the buildings. It is the kind of day designed for wood ﬁres,
and mugs of tea, and well-loved books.
But while James has a ﬁreplace, it’s only gas, and when
she checks the cupboard for her favorite blend, she ﬁnds
the box nestled at the back, but it is empty, and all the

99

books he keeps are histories, not ﬁction, and Addie knows
she cannot pass the day here, with only herself for
company.
She gets dressed again, in her own clothes, and smooths
the covers back onto the bed, even though the cleaners will
surely return before James does. With a last glance at the
dreary day, she steals a scarf from a closet shelf, a soft plaid
cashmere with the tags still on, and sets out, the lock
chiming behind her.
She does not know, at ﬁrst, where she is going.
Some days she still feels like a lion caged, pacing its
enclosure. Her feet have a mind of their own, and soon they
are carrying her uptown.
My name is Addie LaRue, she thinks to herself as she
walks.
Three hundred years, and some part of her is still afraid of
forgetting. There have been times, of course, when she
wished her memory more ﬁckle, when she would have given
anything to welcome madness, and disappear. It is the
kinder road, to lose yourself.
Like Peter, in J. M. Barrie’s Peter Pan.
There, at the end, when Peter sits on the rock, the
memory of Wendy Darling sliding from his mind, and it is
sad, of course, to forget.
But it is a lonely thing, to be forgotten.
To remember when no one else does.
I remember, whispers the darkness, almost kindly, as if
he’s not the one who cursed her.
Perhaps it is the bad weather, or perhaps it is this maudlin
mood that leads Addie up along the eastern edge of Central
Park, to Eighty-second and into the granite halls of the Met.
Addie has always had a fondness for museums.
Spaces where history gathers out of place, where art is
ordered, and artifacts sit on pedestals, or hang on walls

100

above little white didactics. Addie feels like a museum
sometimes, one only she can visit.
She crosses the great hall, with its stone arches and
colonnades, weaves her way through Greco-Roman and past
Oceania, exhibits she has lingered in a hundred times,
continues until she reaches the European sculpture court,
with its grand marble ﬁgures.
One room over, she ﬁnds it, where it always is.
It sits in a glass case along one wall, framed on either
side by pieces made of iron, or silver. It is not large, as far as
sculptures go, the length of her arm, from elbow to
ﬁngertips. A wooden plinth with ﬁve marble birds perched
atop it, each about to ﬂy away. It is the ﬁfth that holds her
gaze: the lift of its beak, the angle of its wings, the soft
down of its feathers captured once in wood, and now in
stone.
Revenir, it’s called. To come back.
Addie remembers the ﬁrst time she found the work, the
small miracle of it, sitting there on its clean white block. The
artist, Arlo Miret, a man she never knew, never met, and yet
here he is, with a piece of her story, her past. Found, and
made into something memorable, something worthwhile,
something beautiful.
She wishes she could touch the little bird, run her ﬁnger
along its wing, the way she always did, even though she
knows it’s not the one she lost, knows this one wasn’t
carved by her father’s strong hands, but by a stranger. Still,
it is there, it is real, it is, in some way, hers.
A secret kept. A record made. The ﬁrst mark she left upon
the world, long before she knew the truth, that ideas are so
much wilder than memories, that they long and look for
ways of taking root.

101

Le Mans, France
July 31, 1714

XVI
Le Mans lies likes a sleeping giant in the ﬁelds along the
Sarthe.
It has been more than ten years since Addie was allowed
to make the trek to the walled city, perched beside her
father in the family cart.
Now her heart quickens as she steps through the city
gates. There is no horse this time, no father, no cart, but in
the late-afternoon light, the city is just as busy, just as
bustling, as she remembered. Addie doesn’t bother trying to
blend in—if, now and then, someone glances her way,
notices the young woman in the stained white dress, they
keep their opinions to themselves. It is easier to be alone
among so many people.
Only—she doesn’t know where to go. She pauses a
moment to think, only to hear hooves clattering, too sudden
and too close, and narrowly escapes being trampled by a
cart.
“Out of the way!” shouts the driver, as she lunges back,
only to collide with a woman carrying a basket of pears. It
tips, spilling three or four onto the cobbled path.
“Watch where you’re going,” snarls the woman, but when
Addie bends to help her fetch the fallen fruit, the woman
screeches and stomps at her ﬁngers.

102

Addie backs away and thrusts her hands into her pockets,
clings to the little wooden bird as she continues through the
winding streets toward the center of the city. There are so
many roads, but they all look the same.
She thought this place would feel more familiar, but it
only feels strange. A ﬁgment from a long-ago dream. When
Addie was last here, the city seemed a wonder, a grand and
vital place: the bustling markets, bathed in sun; the voices
ringing oﬀ of stone; her father’s broad shoulders, blocking
out the city’s darker sides.
But now, alone, a menace has crept in, like fog, erasing
the buoyant charm, leaving only the sharp edges jutting
through the mist. One version of the city replaced by
another.
Palimpsest.
She doesn’t know the word just yet, but ﬁfty years from
now, in a Paris salon, she will hear it for the ﬁrst time, the
idea of the past blotted out, written over by the present,
and think of this moment in Le Mans.
A place she knows, and yet doesn’t.
How foolish to think it would stay the same, when
everything else has changed. When she has changed, grown
from a girl into a woman, and then into this—a phantom, a
ghost.
She swallows hard, and stands up straight, determined
not to fray or fall apart.
But Addie cannot ﬁnd the inn where she and her father
stayed, and even if she could, what did she plan to do
there? She has no way to pay, and even if she had the coin,
who would rent to a woman on her own? Le Mans is a city,
but it is not so big that such a thing would pass beneath a
landlord’s notice.
Addie’s grip tightens on the carving in her skirts as she
continues through the streets. There is a market just past

103

the town hall, but it is closing up, tables empty, the carts
pulling away, the ground littered only with the dregs of
lettuce and a few moldy potatoes, and before she can think
of scrounging for them, they are gone, swept away by
smaller, quicker hands.
There is a tavern inn at the edge of the square.
She watches a man dismount his horse, a dappled mare,
and pass the reins to a stable hand, already turning toward
the noise and hustle of the open doors. She watches the
stable hand lead the mare across the way to a broad
wooden barn, and vanish into the relative dark. But it’s not
the barn that’s caught her eye, or the horse—it’s the pack
still thrown across its back. Two heavy satchels, bulging like
sacks of grain.
Addie crosses the square and slips into the stable behind
the man and the mare, her steps as light and quick as
possible. Sunlight streams weakly through the beams in the
stable roof, casting the place in soft relief, a few highlights
amid the layered shadow, the kind of place she would have
loved to draw.
A dozen horses shuﬄe in their stalls, and across the barn,
the stable hand hums to the mare as he strips away its tack,
tosses the saddle over the wooden divide, and brushes
down the beast, his own hair a nest of knots and snarls.
Addie ducks low, creeping toward the stalls at the back of
the barn, the sacks and satchels strewn on the wooden
barriers between the horses. Her hands dart hungrily across
the trappings, searching beneath buckles and under ﬂaps.
There are no purses, but she ﬁnds a heavy riding coat, a
skin of wine, a boning knife the length of her hand. The coat
she drapes around her shoulders, the blade goes into one
deep pocket and the wine in the other as she creeps on,
quiet as a ghost.

104

She doesn’t see the empty bucket until her shoe cracks
against it with a sharp clatter. It falls with a muﬄed thud
onto the hay, and Addie holds her breath and hopes the
sound is lost among the shuﬄing hooves. But the stable
hand stops humming. She sinks lower, folds herself into the
shadows of the nearest stall. Five seconds pass, then ten,
and then at last the humming starts again, and Addie
straightens and makes her way to the ﬁnal stall, where a
stout draft horse lounges, munching grain, beside a belted
bag. Her ﬁngers drift toward the buckle.
“What are you doing?”
The voice, too close, behind her. The stable hand, no
longer humming, no longer brushing the dappled mare, but
standing in the alley between berths, a crop in his hand.
“Sorry, sir,” she says, a shade breathless. “I came looking
for my father’s horse. He wanted something from his
satchel.”
He stares at her, unblinking, his features half-swallowed
by the dark sprawl of his hair. “Which horse would that be?”
She wishes she’d studied the horses as well as their
packs, but she cannot hesitate, it would reveal the lie, so
she turns quickly toward the workhorse. “This one.”
It is a good lie, as far as lies go, the kind that could have
easily been true, if she’d only picked another horse. A grim
smile twitches beneath the man’s beard.
“Ah,” he says, ﬂicking the crop against his palm, “but you
see, that one’s mine.”
Addie has the strange and sickening urge to laugh.
“Can I pick again?” she whispers, inching toward the
stable door.
Somewhere nearby, a mare whinnies. Another stamps its
hoof. The crop stops snapping against the man’s palm, and
Addie lurches sideways, between the stalls, the stable hand
on her heels.

105

He’s fast, a speed clearly born from catching beasts, but
she is lighter, and has far more to lose. His hand grazes the
collar of her stolen coat, but he cannot catch her; his heavy
steps falter and slow, and Addie thinks she’s free, right
before she hears the crisp, bright sound of a bell ringing on
the stable wall, followed by the sound of boots coming from
outside.
She is nearly to the mouth of the barn when the second
man appears, cutting like a wide shadow across the
doorway.
“Has a beast got free?” he shouts before he sees her,
wrapped in the stolen coat, her too-large boots catching on
the hay. She scrambles backward, right into the arms of the
stable hand. His ﬁngers close around her shoulders, heavy
as shackles, and when she tries to twist free, his grip digs
deep enough to bruise.
“Caught her thieving,” he says, the coarse bristles on his
cheek scraping hers.
“Let me go,” she pleads as he pulls her tight.
“This isn’t a market stall,” sneers the second, drawing a
knife from his belt. “Do you know what we do with thieves?”
“It was a mistake. Please. Let me go.”
The knife wags like a ﬁnger. “Not until you’ve paid.”
“I don’t have any money.”
“That’s all right,” says the second man, drawing closer.
“Thieves pay in ﬂesh.”
She tries to tear free, but the grip on her arms is iron as
the knife comes to rest against the laces of her dress,
plucking them like strings. And when she twists again, she is
no longer trying to get free, simply trying to reach the
boning knife inside the pocket of her stolen coat. Twice her
ﬁngers brush the wooden hilt before she manages to catch
it.

106

She drives the blade down and back into the ﬁrst man’s
thigh, feels it sink into the meat of his leg. He cries out
before he thrusts her away like a hornet, ﬂinging her
forward, right onto the other man’s blade.
Pain screams through her shoulder as the knife bites in,
skates along her collarbone, leaving a trail of searing heat.
Her mind goes blank with it, but her legs are already
moving, carrying her through the stable doors and out into
the square. She throws herself behind a barrel, out of sight,
as the men come stumbling, swearing, out of the barn
behind her, their faces twisted with rage and something
worse, something primal, hungry.
And then, between one step and the next, they begin to
slow.
Between one step and the next, the urgency falters, and
fades, the purpose slipping, like a thought, out of reach. The
men look around, and then at each other. The one she
stabbed stands straighter now, no sign of the tear in his
trousers, no blood soaking through the fabric. The mark she
left on him, erased.
They jostle, and rib, and head back into the barn, and
Addie slumps forward, her head coming to rest against the
wooden barrel. Her chest throbs, pain tracing a vivid line
along her collar, and when she presses her hand to the
wound, her ﬁngers come away red.
She cannot stay there, curled behind the barrel, forces
herself up, and sways, feeling faint, but soon the wave of
sickness passes, and she is still on her feet. She walks, one
hand pressed to her shoulder, and the other closed tight
around the knife beneath her stolen coat. She doesn’t know
when she decides to leave Le Mans, but soon enough she is
crossing the courtyard, away from the stable and through
the winding streets, past bawdy inns and tavern houses,

107

past crowded steps and raucous laughter, giving the city up
with every step.
The ache in her shoulder fades from a searing heat to a
dull throb, and then, to nothing. She runs her ﬁngers over
the gash, but it is gone. As is the blood on her dress,
swallowed up like the words she scrawled across her
father’s parchment, the lines she drew in the silt on the
riverbank. The only traces of it are on her skin, a crust of
drying blood along her collarbone, a smear of browning red
across her palm. And Addie marvels a moment, despite
herself, at the strange magic of it, the proof that in one way,
the shadow kept his word. Twisted it, yes, warped her
wishes into something wrong and rotten. But granted her
this, at least.
To live.
A small, mad sound escapes her throat, and there is relief
in it, perhaps, but also horror. For the truth of her hunger,
which she is only just discovering. For the ache in her feet,
though they do not cut or bruise. For the pain of the wound
in her shoulder, before it healed. The darkness has granted
her freedom from death, perhaps, but not from this. Not
from suﬀering.
It will be years before she learns the true meaning of that
word, but in this moment, as she walks into the thickening
dusk, she is still relieved to be alive.
A relief that ﬂickers when she reaches the edge of the
city.
This is as far as Adeline has ever gone.
Le Mans looms at her back, and ahead the high stone
walls give way to scattered towns, each one like a copse of
tress, and then, to open ﬁeld, and then, to what, she does
not know.
When Addie was young, she would surge up the slopes
that rose and fell around Villon, ﬂing herself to the very

108

edge of the hill, the place where the ground fell away, and
stop, heart racing as her body leaned forward, longing for
the fall.
The slightest push, and weight would do the rest.
There is no steep hill beneath her now, no slope, and yet,
she feels her balance tilt.
And then, Estele’s voice rises to meet her in the dark.
How do you walk to the end of the world? she once asked.
And when Addie didn’t know, the old woman smiled that
wrinkled grin, and answered.
One step at a time.
Addie is not going to the end of the world, but she must
go somewhere, and in that moment, she decides.
She is going to Paris.
It is, beside Le Mans, the only city she knows by name, a
place that played so many times across her stranger’s lips,
and featured into every tale her father told, a place of gods
and kings, gold and majesty, and promise.
This is how it starts, he would have said, if he could see
her now.
Addie takes the ﬁrst step, and feels the ground give way,
feels herself tip forward, but this time, she does not fall.

109

New York City
March 12, 2014

XVII
It is a better day.
The sun is out, the air is not so cold, and there is so much
to love about a city like New York.
The food, the art, the constant oﬀerings of culture—
though Addie’s favorite thing is its scale. Towns and villages
are easily conquered. A week in Villon was enough to walk
every path, to learn every face. But with cities like Paris,
London, Chicago, New York, she doesn’t have to pace
herself, doesn’t have to take small bites to make the
newness last. A city she can consume as hungrily as she
likes, devour it every day and never run out of things to eat.
It is the kind of place that takes years to visit, and still
there always seems to be another alley, another set of
steps, another door.
Perhaps that’s why she hasn’t noticed it before.
Set oﬀ from the curb, and down a short ﬂight of steps,
there is a shop half-hidden by the line of the street. The
awning was clearly once purple, but has long faded toward
gray, though the shop’s name is still legible, picked out in
white lettering.
The Last Word.
A used bookstore, judging by the name, and the windows
brimming with stacked spines. Addie’s pulse thrills a little.
She was certain she’d found them all. But that is the brilliant

110

thing about New York. Addie has wandered a fair portion of
the ﬁve boroughs, and still the city has its secrets, some
tucked in corners—basement bars, speakeasies, membersonly clubs—and others sitting in plain sight. Like Easter eggs
in a movie, the ones you don’t notice until the second or
third viewing. And not like Easter eggs at all, because no
matter how many times she walks these blocks, no matter
how many hours, or days, or years she spends learning the
contours of New York, as soon as she turns her back it
seems to shift again, reassemble. Buildings go up and come
down, businesses open and close, people arrive and depart
and the deck shuﬄes itself again and again and again.
Of course, she goes in.
A faint bell announces her arrival, the sound quickly
smothered by the crush of books in various conditions.
Some bookstores are organized, more gallery than shop.
Some are sterile, reserved for only the new and untouched.
But not this one.
This shop is a labyrinth of stacks and shelves, texts
stacked two, even three deep, leather beside paper beside
board. Her favorite kind of store, one that’s easy to get lost
in.
There is a checkout counter by the door, but it is empty,
and she wanders, unmolested, through the aisles, picking
her way along the well-loved shelves. The bookshop seems
fairly empty, save for an older white man studying a row of
thrillers, a gorgeous Black girl sitting cross-legged in a
leather chair at the end of a row, silver shining on her
ﬁngers and in her ears, a giant art book open in her lap.
Addie wanders past a placard marked POETRY, and the
darkness whispers against her skin. Teeth skimming like a
blade along a bare shoulder.
Come live with me and be my love.
Addie’s refrain, worn smooth with repetition.

111

You do not know what love is.
She doesn’t stop, but turns the corner, ﬁngers trailing
now along THEOLOGY. She has read the Bible, the Upanishads,
the Quran, after a spiritual bender of sorts a century ago.
She passes Shakespeare, too, a religion all his own.
She pauses at MEMOIR, studying the titles on the spines, so
many I’s and Me’s and My’s, possessive words for
possessive lives. What a luxury, to tell one’s story. To be
read, remembered.
Something knocks against Addie’s elbow, and she looks
down to see a pair of amber eyes peering over her sleeve,
surrounded by a mass of orange fur. The cat looks as old as
the book in her hand. It opens its mouth, and lets out
something between a yawn and a meow, a hollow, whistling
sound.
“Hello.” She scratches the cat between the ears, eliciting
a low rumble of pleasure.
“Wow,” says a male voice behind her. “Book doesn’t
usually bother with people.”
Addie turns, about to comment on the cat’s name, but
loses her train of thought when she sees him, because for a
moment, only a moment, before the face comes into focus,
she is certain it is—
But it is not him.
Of course it is not.
The boy’s hair, though black, falls in loose curls around
his face, and his eyes, behind their thick-frame glasses, are
closer to gray than green. There is something fragile to
them, more like glass than stone, and when he speaks, his
voice is gentle, warm, undeniably human. “Help you ﬁnd
anything?”
Addie shakes her head. “No,” she says, clearing her
throat. “Just browsing.”
“Well then,” he says with a smile. “Carry on.”

112

She watches him go, black curls vanishing into the maze
of titles, before dragging her gaze back to the cat.
But the cat is gone, too.
Addie returns the memoir to the shelf and continues
browsing, attention wandering over ART and WORLD HISTORY, all
the while waiting for the boy to reappear, to start the cycle
over, wondering what she’ll say when he does. She should
have asked for help, let him lead her through the shelves—
but he doesn’t come back.
The shop bell chimes again, announcing a new customer
as Addie reaches the Classics. Beowulf. Antigone. The
Odyssey. There are a dozen versions of this last, and she’s
just drawing one out when there’s a sudden burst of
laughter, high and light, and she glances through a gap in
the shelves and sees a blond girl leaning on the counter.
The boy stands on the other side, cleaning his glasses on
the edge of his shirt.
He bows his head, dark lashes skimming his cheeks.
He isn’t even looking at the girl, who’s rising on her toes
to get closer to him. She reaches out and runs one hand
along his sleeve the way Addie just did along the shelves,
and he smiles, then, a quiet, bashful grin that erases the
last of his resemblance to the dark.
Addie tucks the book under her arm and heads for the
door, and out, taking advantage of his distraction.
“Hey!” calls a voice—his voice—but she continues up the
steps onto the street. In a moment, he will forget. In a
moment, his mind will trail oﬀ, and he’ll—
A hand lands on her shoulder.
“You have to pay for that.”
She turns, and there’s the boy from the shop, a little
breathless, and very annoyed. Her eyes ﬂick past him to the
steps, the open door. It must have been ajar. He must have
been right behind her. But still. He followed her out.

113

“Well?” he demands, hand dropping from her shoulder
and coming to rest, palm open, in the space between them.
She could run, of course, but it’s not worth it. She checks
the cost on the back of the book. It isn’t much, but it’s more
than she has on her.
“Sorry,” she says, handing it back.
He frowns, then, a furrow too deep for his face. The kind
of line carved by years of repetition, even though he can’t
be more than thirty. He looks down at the book, and a dark
brow lifts behind his glasses.
“A shop full of antique books, and you steal a battered
paperback of The Odyssey? You know this won’t fetch
anything, right?”
Addie holds his gaze. “Who says I wanted to resell it?”
“It’s also in Greek.”
That, she hadn’t noticed. Not that it matters. She learned
the classics in Latin ﬁrst, but in the decades since, she’s
picked up Greek.
“Silly me,” she says dryly, “I should have stolen it in
English.”
He almost—almost—smiles, then, but it’s a bemused,
misshapen thing. Instead, he shakes his head. “Just take it,”
he says, holding out the book. “I think the shop can spare
it.”
She has to ﬁght the sudden urge to push it back.
The gesture feels too much like charity.
“Henry!” calls the pretty Black girl from the doorway.
“Should I call the cops?”
“No,” he calls back, still looking at Addie. “It’s ﬁne.” He
narrows his eyes, as if studying her. “Honest mistake.”
She stares at this boy—at Henry. Then she reaches out
and takes back the book, cradling it against her as the
bookseller vanishes back into the shop.

114

115

PART TWO

116

THE DARKEST PART OF THE NIGHT

117

Title: One Forgotten Night
Artist: Samantha Benning
Date: 2014
Medium: Acrylic on canvas over wood
Location: On loan from the Lisette Price Gallery, NYC
Description: A largely monochromatic piece, paint layered into a
topography of black, charcoals, and grays. Seven small white dots stand
out against the backdrop.
Background: Known largely on its own, this painting also serves as the
frontispiece for an ongoing series titled I Look Up to You, in which
Benning imagines family, friends, and lovers as diﬀerent iterations of the
sky.
Estimated Value: $11,500

118

New York City
March 12, 2014

I
Henry Strauss heads back into the shop.
Bea’s taken up residence again in the battered leather
chair, the glossy art book open in her lap. “Where did you
go?”
He looks back through the open door and frowns.
“Nowhere.”
She shrugs, turning through the pages, a guide to
neoclassical art that she has no intention of buying.
Not a library. Henry sighs, returning to the till.
“Sorry,” he says to the girl by the counter. “Where were
we?”
She bites her lip. Her name is Emily, he thinks. “I was
about to ask if you wanted to grab a drink.”
He laughs, a little nervously—a habit he’s beginning to
think he’ll never shake. She’s pretty, she really is, but
there’s the troublesome shine in her eyes, a familiar milky
light, and he’s relieved he doesn’t have to lie about having
plans tonight.
“Another time,” she says with a smile.
“Another time,” he echoes as the girl takes her book and
goes. The door has barely closed when Bea clears her
throat.
“What?” he asks without turning.
“You could have gotten her number.”

119

“We have plans,” he says, tapping the tickets on the
counter.
He hears the soft stretch of leather as she rises from the
chair. “You know,” she says, swinging an arm around his
shoulder, “the great thing about plans is that you can make
them for other days, too.”
He turns, hands rising to her waist, and now they’re
locked like kids in the throes of a school dance, limbs
making wide circles like nets, or chains.
“Beatrice Helen,” he scolds.
“Henry Samuel.”
They stand there, in the middle of the store, two twentysomethings in a preteen embrace. And maybe once upon a
time Bea would have leaned a little harder, made some
speech about ﬁnding someone (new), about deserving to be
happy (again). But they have a deal: she doesn’t mention
Tabitha, and Henry doesn’t mention the Professor. Everyone
has their fallen foes, their battle scars.
“Excuse me,” says an older man, sounding genuinely
sorry to interrupt. He holds up a book, and Henry smiles and
breaks the chain, ducking back behind the counter to ring
him up. Bea swipes her ticket from the table and says she’ll
meet him at the show, and Henry nods her oﬀ and the old
man goes on his way, and the rest of the afternoon is a
quiet blur of pleasant strangers.
He turns the sign over at ﬁve to six, and goes through the
motions of closing up the shop. The Last Word isn’t his, but
it might as well be. It’s been weeks since he saw the actual
owner, Meredith, who’s spending her golden years traveling
the world on her late husband’s life insurance. A fall woman
indulging in a second spring.
Henry scoops a handful of kibble into the small red dish
behind the counter for Book, the shop’s ancient cat, and a
moment later, a ratty orange head pokes up over the

120

chapbooks in POETRY. The cat likes to climb behind a stack
and sleep for days, his presence marked only by the
emptying dish and the occasional gasp of a customer when
they come across a pair of unblinking yellow eyes at the
back of the shelves.
Book is the only one who’s been at the bookstore longer
than Henry.
He’s worked there for the last ﬁve years, having started
back when he was still a grad student in theology. At ﬁrst it
was just a part-time gig, a way to supplement the university
stipend, but then school went away, and the store stayed.
Henry knows he should probably get another job, because
the pay is shit and he has twenty-one years of expensive
formal education, and then of course there’s his brother
David’s voice, which sounds exactly like their father’s voice,
calmly asking where this job leads, if this is really how he
plans to spend his life. But Henry doesn’t know what else to
do, and he can’t bring himself to leave; it’s the only thing he
hasn’t failed out of yet.
And the truth is, Henry loves the store. Loves the smell of
books, and the steady weight of them on shelves, the
presence of old titles and the arrival of new ones and the
fact that in a city like New York, there will always be readers.
Bea insists that everyone who works in a bookstore wants
to be a writer, but Henry’s never fancied himself a novelist.
Sure, he’s tried putting pen to paper, but it never really
works. He can’t ﬁnd the words, the story, the voice. Can’t
ﬁgure out what he could possibly add to so many shelves.
Henry would rather be a storykeeper than a storyteller.
He turns oﬀ the lights and grabs the ticket and his coat,
and heads over to Robbie’s show.

Henry didn’t have time to change.
121

The show starts at seven, and The Last Word closed at
six, and anyways he isn’t sure what the dress code is for an
oﬀ-oﬀ-Broadway show about faeries in the Bowery, so he’s
still in dark jeans and a tattered sweater. It’s what Bea likes
to call Librarian Chic, even though he doesn’t work in a
library, a fact she cannot seem to grasp. Bea, on the other
hand, looks painfully fashionable, as she always does, with a
white blazer rolled up to her elbows, thin silver bands
wrapped around her ﬁngers and shining in her ears, thick
dreads coiled in a crown atop her head. Henry wonders, as
they wait in the queue, if some people have natural style, or
if they simply have the discipline to curate themselves
every day.
They shuﬄe forward, presenting their tickets at the door.
The play is one of those strange medleys of theater and
modern dance that only exist in a place like New York.
According to Robbie, it’s loosely based on A Midsummer
Night’s Dream, if someone had ﬁled Shakespeare’s cadence
smooth, and cranked up the saturation.
Bea knocks him in the ribs.
“Did you see the way she looked at you?”
He blinks. “What? Who?”
Bea rolls her eyes. “You are entirely hopeless.”
The lobby bustles around them, and they’re wading
through the crowd when another person catches Henry’s
arm. A girl, wrapped in a tattered bohemian dress, green
paint ﬂourishes like abstract vines on her temples and
cheeks, marking her as one of the actors of the show. He’s
seen the remnants on Robbie’s skin a dozen times in the
last few weeks.
She holds up a paintbrush and a bowl of gold. “You’re not
adorned,” she says with sober sincerity, and before he can
think to stop her, she paints gold dust on his cheeks, the

122

brush’s touch feather-light. This close, he can see that faint
shimmer in the girl’s eyes.
Henry tips his chin.
“How do I look?” he asks, aﬀecting a model’s pout, and
even though he’s joking, the girl ﬂashes him an earnest
smile and says, “Perfect.”
A shiver rolls through him at the word, and he is
somewhere else, a hand holding his in the dark, a thumb
brushing his cheek. But he shakes it oﬀ.
Bea lets the girl paint a shining stripe down her nose, a
dot of gold on her chin, manages to get in a solid thirty
seconds of ﬂirting before bells chime through the lobby, and
the artistic sprite vanishes back into the crowd as they
continue toward the theater doors.
Henry threads his arm through Bea’s. “You don’t think I’m
perfect, do you?”
She snorts. “God, no.”
And he smiles, despite himself, as another actor, a darkskinned man with rose-gold on his cheeks, hands them each
a branch, the leaves too green to be real. His gaze lingers
on Henry, kind, and sad, and shining.
They show their tickets to an usher—an old woman,
white-haired and barely ﬁve feet tall—and she holds on to
Henry’s arm for balance as she shows them to their row,
pats his elbow when she leaves them, murmuring, “Such a
good boy” as she toddles up the aisle.
Henry looks at the number on his ticket, and they
sidestep over to their seats, a group of three near the
middle of the row. Henry sits, Bea on one side, the empty
seat on the other. The seat reserved for Tabitha, because of
course they’d bought their tickets months ago, when they
were still together, when everything was a plural instead of
a singular.

123

A dull ache ﬁlls Henry’s chest, and he wishes he’d paid
the ten dollars for a drink.
The lights go down, and the curtain goes up on a kingdom
of neon and spray-painted steel, and there is Robbie in the
middle of it all, lounging on a throne in a pose that is pure
goblin king.
His hair curls up in a high wave, streaks of purple and
gold carving the lines of his face into something stunning
and strange. And when he smiles, it is easy to remember
how Henry fell in love, back when they were nineteen, a
tangle of lust, and loneliness, and far-oﬀ dreams. And when
Robbie speaks, his voice is crystal, reﬂecting across the
theater.
“This,” he says, “is a story of gods.”
The stage ﬁlls with players, the music begins, and for a
while, it is easy.
For a while, the world falls away, and everything quiets
around them, and Henry disappears.

Toward the end of the play there is a scene that will press
itself into the dark of Henry’s mind, exposed like light on
ﬁlm.
Robbie, the Bowery king, rises from his throne as rain falls
in a single sheet across the stage, and even though,
moments earlier, it was crowded with people, now,
somehow, there is only Robbie. He reaches out, hand
skimming the curtain of rain, and it parts around his ﬁngers,
his wrist, his arm as he moves forward inch by inch until his
whole body is beneath the wave.
He tips his head back, the rain rinsing gold and glitter
from his skin, ﬂattening the perfect wave of curls against his
skull, erasing all traces of magic, turning him from a languid,
arrogant prince into a boy; mortal, vulnerable, alone.
124

The lights go out, and for a long moment, the only sound
in the theater is the rain, fading from a solid wall to the
steady rhythm of a downpour, and after, to the soft patter of
drops on the stage.
And then, at last, nothing.
The lights come up, and the cast takes the stage, and
everyone applauds. Bea cheers, and looks at Henry, the joy
bleeding from her face.
“What’s wrong?” she asks. “You look like you’re about to
faint.”
He swallows, shakes his head.
His hand is throbbing, and when he looks down, he’s dug
his nails into the scar along his palm, drawing a fresh line of
blood.
“Henry?”
“I’m ﬁne,” he says, wiping his hand on the velvet seat. “It
was just. It was good.”
He stands, and follows Bea out.
The crowd thins until it’s mostly friends and family
waiting for the actors to reappear. But Henry feels the eyes,
attention drifting like a current. Everywhere he looks, he
ﬁnds a friendly face, a warm smile, and sometimes, more.
Finally Robbie comes bounding into the lobby, and throws
his arms around both of them.
“My adoring fans!” he says, in a thespian’s ringing alto.
Henry snorts, and Bea holds out a chocolate rose, a long
inside joke since Robbie once bemoaned that you had to
choose between chocolates and ﬂowers, and Bea pointed
out that that was Valentine’s Day, and that for
performances, ﬂowers were typical, and Robbie said he
wasn’t typical, and besides, what if he was hungry?
“You were great,” says Henry, and it’s true. Robbie is
great—he’s always been great. That trifecta of dance,
music, and theater required to get work in New York. He’s

125

still a few streets oﬀ Broadway, but Henry has no doubt he’ll
get there.
He runs his hand through Robbie’s hair.
Dry, it is the color of burnt sugar, a tawny shade
somewhere between brown and red, depending on the light.
But right now it’s still wet from the ﬁnal scene, and for a
second, Robbie leans into the touch, resting the weight of
his head in Henry’s hand. His chest tightens, and he has to
remind his heart it is not real, not anymore.
Henry pats his friend’s back, and Robbie straightens, as if
revived, renewed. He holds his rose aloft like a baton and
announces, “To the party!”

Henry used to think that after-parties were only for last
shows, a way for the cast to say good-bye, but he’s since
learned that, for theater kids, every performance is an
excuse to celebrate. To come down from the high, or in the
case of Robbie’s crowd, to keep it going.
It’s almost midnight, and they’re packed into a third-ﬂoor
walk-up in SoHo, the lights low and someone’s playlist
pumping through a pair of wireless speakers. The cast
moves through the center like a vein, their faces still
painted but their costumes shed, caught between their
onstage characters and their oﬀstage selves.
Henry drinks a lukewarm beer and rubs his thumb along
the scar on his palm, in what’s quickly becoming a habit.
For a while, he had Bea to keep him company.
Bea, who much prefers dinner parties to theater ones,
place settings and dialogues to plastic cups and lines
shouted over stereos. A groaning compatriot, huddled with
Henry in the corner, studying the tapestry of actors as if
they were in one of her art history books. But then another
Bowery sprite whisked her away, and Henry shouted traitor
126

in their wake, even though he was glad to see Bea happy
again.
Meanwhile, Robbie is dancing in the middle of the room,
always the center of the party.
He gestures for Henry to join him, but Henry shakes his
head, ignoring the pull, the easy draw of gravity, the open
arms waiting at the end of the fall. At his worst, they were a
perfect match, the diﬀerences between them purely
gravitational. Robbie, who always managed to stay alight,
while Henry came crashing down.
“Hey, handsome.”
Henry turns, looking up from his beer, and sees one of the
leads from the show, a stunning girl with rust-red lips and a
white lily crown, the gold glitter on her cheeks stenciled to
look like graﬃti. She is looking at him with such open want
he should feel wanted, should feel something besides sad,
lonely, lost.
“Drink with me.”
Her blue eyes shine as she holds out a little tray, a pair of
shots with something small and white dissolving on the
bottom. Henry thinks of all the stories about accepting food
and drink from the fae, even as he reaches for the glass. He
drinks, and at ﬁrst all he tastes is sweetness, the faint burn
of tequila, but then the world begins to fuzz a little at the
edges.
He wants to feel lighter, to feel brighter, but the room
darkens, and he can feel a storm creeping in.
He was twelve when the ﬁrst one rolled through. He didn’t
see it coming. One day the skies were blue and the next the
clouds were low and dense, and the next, the wind was up
and it was pouring rain.
It would be years before Henry learned to think of those
dark times as storms, to believe that they would pass, if he
could simply hold on long enough.

127

His parents meant well, of course, but they always told
him things like Cheer up, or It will get better, or worse, It’s
not that bad, which is easy to say when you’ve never had a
day of rain. Henry’s oldest brother, David, is a doctor, but he
still doesn’t understand. His sister, Muriel, says she does,
that all artists suﬀer through their storms, before oﬀering
him a pill from the mint container she keeps in her purse.
Her little pink umbrellas, she calls them, playing on his
metaphor; as if it’s just a clever turn of phrase and not the
only way Henry can try to make them understand what it’s
like inside his head.
It is just a storm, he thinks again, even as he pulls away
from the scene, makes some excuse about going to ﬁnd air.
The party is too warm, and he wants to be outside, wants to
go onto the roof and look up and see there is no bad
weather, only stars, but of course, there are no stars, not in
SoHo.
He makes it halfway down the hall before he stops,
remembering the show, the sight of Robbie in the rain, and
shivers, deciding to go down instead of up, deciding to go
home.
And he’s almost to the door when she catches his hand.
The girl with ivy curling over her skin. The one who painted
him gold.
“It’s you,” she says.
“It’s you,” he says.
She reaches out and wipes a ﬂeck of gold from Henry’s
cheek, and the contact is like static shock, a spark of energy
where skin meets skin.
“Don’t go,” she says, and he’s still trying to think of what
to say next when she pulls him close, and he kisses her,
quick, searching, breaks oﬀ when he hears her gasp.
“Sorry,” he says, the word automatic, like please, like
thank you, like I’m ﬁne.

128

But she reaches up and grabs a handful of his curls.
“What for?” she asks, drawing his mouth back to hers.
“Are you sure?” he murmurs, even though he knows what
she will say, because he’s already seen the light in her eyes,
the pale clouds sweeping through her vision. “Is this what
you want?”
He wants the truth—but there is no truth for him, not
anymore, and the girl just smiles, and draws him back
against the nearest door.
“This,” she says, “is exactly what I want.”
And then they are in one of the bedrooms, the door
clicking shut and blotting out the noises of the party beyond
the wall, and her mouth is on his, and he cannot see her
eyes now in the dark, so it’s easy to believe that this is real.
And for a while, Henry disappears.

129

New York City
March 12, 2014

II
Addie makes her way uptown, reading The Odyssey by
streetlight. It’s been a while since she read anything in
Greek, but the poetic cadence of the epic poem draws her
back into the stride of the old language, and by the time the
Baxter comes into sight, she is half-lost in the image of the
ship at sea, looking forward to a glass of wine and a hot
bath.
And destined for neither.
Her timing is either very good, or very bad, depending on
how you look at it, because Addie rounds the corner onto
Fifty-sixth just as a black sedan pulls up in front of the
Baxter and James St. Clair steps out onto the curb. He’s
back from his ﬁlming, tan and seemingly happy, wearing a
pair of sunglasses despite the fact it’s after dark. Addie
slows, and stops, hovers across the street as the doorman
helps him unload and carry his bags inside.
“Shit,” she mutters under her breath as her night
dissolves. No bubble baths, no bottles of merlot.
She sighs and retreats to the intersection, trying to decide
what to do next.
To her left, Central Park unravels like a dark green cloth in
the center of the city.
To her right, Manhattan rises in jagged lines, block after
block of crowded buildings from Midtown down to the

130

Financial District.
She goes right, making her way down toward the East
Village.
Her stomach begins to growl, and on Second, she catches
sight of dinner. A young man on a bicycle dismounts on the
curb, unpacks an order from the zippered case behind the
seat, and jogs the plastic bag up to the building. Addie drifts
up to the bike and reaches in. It’s Chinese, she guesses,
going by the size and shape of the containers, the paper
edges folded and bound with thin metal handles. She plucks
out a carton, and a pair of disposable chopsticks, and slips
away before the man at the door has even paid.
There was a time she felt guilty about stealing.
But the guilt, like so many things, has worn away, and
even though the hunger can’t kill her, it still hurts as though
it will.
Addie makes her way toward Avenue C, scooping lo mein
into her mouth as her legs carry her through the Village to a
brick building with a green door. She dumps the empty
carton in a trash can on the corner and reaches the building
entrance just as a man is coming out. She smiles at him,
and he smiles back and holds the door.
Inside, she climbs four ﬂights of narrow steps to a steel
door at the top, reaches up, and feels along the dusty frame
for the small silver key, discovered last fall, when she and a
lover stumbled home, the two a tangle of limbs on the
stairs. Sam’s lips pressed beneath her jaw, paint-streaked
ﬁngers sliding beneath the waistband of her jeans.
It was, for Sam, a rare impulsive moment.
It was, for Addie, the second month of an aﬀair.
A passionate aﬀair, to be sure, but only because time is a
luxury she can’t aﬀord. Sure, she dreams of sleepy
mornings over coﬀee, legs draped across a lap, inside jokes
and easy laughter, but those comforts come with the

131

knowing. There can be no slow build, no quiet lust, intimacy
fostered over days, weeks, months. Not for them. So she
longs for the mornings, but she settles for the nights, and if
it cannot be love, well, then, at least it is not lonely.
Her ﬁngers close around the key, the metal scraping
softly as she drags it from its hiding spot. It takes three tries
in the rusted old lock, just like it did that ﬁrst night, but then
the door swings open, and she steps out onto the building’s
roof. A breeze kicks up, and she shoves her hands in the
pocket of her leather jacket as she crosses the roof.
It’s empty, save for a trio of lawn chairs, each of them
imperfect in its own way—seats warped, stuck in diﬀerent
poses of recline, one arm hanging at a broken angle. A
stained cooler sits nearby, and a string of fairy lights hangs
between laundry posts, transforming the roof into a shabby,
weather-worn oasis.
It’s quiet up here—not silent, that is a thing she’s yet to
ﬁnd in a city, a thing she is beginning to think lost amid the
weeds of the old world—but as quiet as it gets in this part of
Manhattan. And yet, it is not the same kind of quiet that
stiﬂed her at James’s place, not the empty, internal quiet of
places too big for one. It is a living quiet, full of distant
shouts and car horns and stereo bass reduced to an ambient
static.
A low brick wall surrounds the roof, and Addie lets herself
lean forward against it, resting her elbows and looking out
until the building falls away, and all she can see is the lights
of Manhattan, tracing patterns against the vast and starless
sky.
Addie misses stars.
She met a boy, back in ’65, and when she told him that,
he drove her an hour outside of L.A., just to see them. The
way his face glowed with pride when he pulled over in the
dark and pointed up. Addie had craned her head and looked

132

at the meager oﬀering, the spare string of lights across the
sky, and felt something in her sag. A heavy sadness, like
loss. And for the ﬁrst time in a century, she longed for Villon.
For home. For a place where the stars were so bright they
formed a river, a stream of silver and purple light against
the dark.
She looks up now, over the rooftops, and wonders if, after
all this time, the darkness is still watching. Even though it
has been so long. Even though he told her once that he
doesn’t keep track of every life, pointed out that the world
was big and full of souls, and he had far more to occupy
himself than thoughts of her.
The rooftop door crashes open behind her, and a handful
of people stumble out.
Two guys. Two girls.
And Sam.
Wrapped in a white sweater and pale gray jeans, her body
like a brushstroke, long and lean and bright against the
backdrop of the darkened roof. Her hair is longer now, wild
blond curls escaping a messy bun. Streaks of red paint dab
her forearms where the sleeves are pushed up, and Addie
wonders, almost absently, what she’s working on. She is a
painter. Abstracts, mostly. Her place, already small, made
smaller by the stacks of canvas propped against the walls.
Her name, crisp and easy, only Samantha on her ﬁnished
work, or when traced across a spine in the middle of the
night.
The other four move in a huddle of noise across the roof,
one of the guys in the middle of a story, but Sam lags
behind a step, head tipped back to savor the crisp night air,
and Addie wishes she had something else to stare at. An
anchor to keep her from falling into the easy gravity of the
other girl’s orbit.
She does, of course.

133

The Odyssey.
Addie is about to bury her gaze in the book, when Sam’s
blue eyes dip down from the sky and ﬁnd her own. The
painter smiles, and for an instant, it is August again, and
they are laughing over beers on a bar patio, Addie lifting the
hair oﬀ her neck to calm the ﬂush of summer heat. Sam
leaning in to blow on her skin. It is September, and they are
in her unmade bed, their ﬁngers tangled in the sheets and
with each other as Addie’s mouth traces the dark warmth
between Sam’s legs.
Addie’s heart slams in her chest as the girl peels away
from her group and casually wanders over. “Sorry for
crashing your peace.”
“Oh, I don’t mind,” says Addie, forcing her gaze out, as if
studying the city, even though Sam always made her feel
like a sunﬂower, unconsciously angling toward the other
girl’s light.
“These days, everyone’s looking down,” muses Sam. “It’s
nice to see someone looking up.”
Time slides. It’s the same thing Sam said the ﬁrst time
they met. And the sixth. And the tenth. But it’s not just a
line. Sam has an artist’s eye, present, searching, the kind
that studies their subject and sees something more than
shapes.
Addie turns away, waits for the sound of retreating steps,
but instead, she hears the snap of a lighter, and then Sam is
beside her, a white-blond curl dancing at the edge of her
sight. She gives in, glances over.
“Could I steal one of those?” she asks, nodding at the
cigarette.
Sam smiles. “You could. But you don’t need to.” She
draws another from the box and hands it over, along with a
neon blue lighter. Addie takes them, tucks the cigarette
between her lips and drags her thumb along the starter.

134

Luckily the breeze is up, and she has an excuse, watching
the ﬂame as it goes out.
Goes out. Goes out. Goes out.
“Here.”
Sam steps closer, her shoulder brushing Addie’s as she
steps in to block the wind. She smells like the chocolate-chip
cookies that her neighbor bakes whenever he’s stressed,
like the lavender soap she uses to scrub paint from her
ﬁngers, the coconut conditioner she leaves in her curls at
night.
Addie has never loved the taste of tobacco, but the
smoke warms her chest, and it gives her something to do
with her hands, a thing to focus on besides Sam. They are
so close, breaths fogging the same bit of air, and then Sam
reaches out and touches one of the freckles on Addie’s right
cheek, the way she did the ﬁrst time they met, a gesture so
simple and still so intimate.
“You have stars,” she says, and Addie’s chest tightens,
twists again.
Déjà vu. Déjà su. Déjà vecu.
She has to ﬁght the urge to close the gap, to run her palm
along the long slope of Sam’s neck, to let it rest against the
nape, where Addie knows it ﬁts so well. They stand in
silence, blowing out clouds of pale smoke, the other four
laughing and shouting at their backs, until one of the guys—
Eric? Aaron?—calls Sam over, and just like that, she is
slipping away, back across the roof. Addie ﬁghts the urge to
tighten her grip, instead of letting go—again.
But she does.
Leans against the low brick wall and listens to them talk,
about life, about getting old, about bucket lists and bad
decisions, and then one of the girls says, “Shit, we’re gonna
be late.” And just like that, beers get ﬁnished, cigarettes put

135

out, and the group of them drifts back toward the rooftop
door, all ﬁve retreating like a tide.
Sam is the last to go.
She slows, glances over her shoulder, ﬂashing a last smile
at Addie before she ducks inside, and Addie knows she
could catch her if she runs, could beat the closing door.
She doesn’t move.
The metal bangs shut.
Addie sags against the brick wall.
Being forgotten, she thinks, is a bit like going mad. You
begin to wonder what is real, if you are real. After all, how
can a thing be real if it cannot be remembered? It’s like that
Zen koan, the one about the tree falling in the woods.
If no one heard it, did it happen?
If a person cannot leave a mark, do they exist?
Addie stubs the cigarette out on the brick ledge, and
turns her back on the skyline, makes her way to the broken
chairs and the cooler wedged between them. She ﬁnds a
single beer ﬂoating amid the half-frozen melt and twists oﬀ
the cap, sinking onto the least-damaged lawn chair.
It is not so cold tonight, and she is too tired to go looking
for another bed.
The glow of the fairy lights is just enough to see by, and
Addie stretches out in the lawn chair, and opens The
Odyssey, and reads of strange lands, and monsters, and
men who can’t ever go home, until the cold lulls her to
sleep.

136

Paris, France
August 9, 1714

III
Heat hangs like a low roof over Paris.
The August air is heavy, made heavier still by the sprawl
of stone buildings, the reek of rotting food and human
refuse, the sheer number of bodies living shoulder to
shoulder.
In a hundred and ﬁfty years, Haussman will set his mark
upon the city, raise a uniform facade and paint the buildings
in the same pale palette, creating a testament to art, and
evenness, and beauty.
That is the kind of Paris Addie dreamed of, and one she
will certainly live to see.
But right now, the poor pile themselves in ragged heaps
while silk-ﬁnished nobles stroll through gardens. The streets
are crowded with horse-drawn carts, the squares thick with
people, and here and there spires thrust up through the
woolen fabric of the city. Wealth parades down avenues, and
rises with the peaks of each palace and estate, while hovels
cluster in narrow roads, the stones stained dark with grime
and smoke.
Addie is too overwhelmed to notice any of it.
She skirts the edge of a square, watching as men
dismantle market stalls, and kick out at the ragged children
who duck and weave between them, searching for scraps.
As she walks, her hand slips into the hem pocket of her

137

skirts, past the little wooden bird to the four copper sols she
found in the lining of the stolen coat. Four sols, to make a
life.
It is getting late, and threatening to rain, and she must
ﬁnd a place to sleep. It should be easy enough—there is, it
seems, a lodging house on every street—but she is hardly
across the threshold of the ﬁrst when she is turned away.
“This is no brothel,” chides the owner, glaring down his
nose.
“And I’m no whore,” she answers, but he only sneers, and
ﬂicks his ﬁngers as if casting oﬀ some unwanted residue.
The second house is full, the third too costly, the fourth
harbors only men. By the time she steps through the doors
of the ﬁfth the sun has set, and her spirits with it, and she is
already braced for the rebuke, some excuse as to why she is
unﬁt to stay beneath the roof.
But she isn’t turned away.
An older woman meets her in the entry, thin, and stiﬀ,
with a long nose and the small, sharp eyes of a hawk. She
takes one look at Addie and leads her down the hall. The
rooms are small, and dingy, but they have walls and doors,
a window and a bed.
“A week’s pay,” demands the woman, “in advance.”
Addie’s heart sinks. A week seems an impossible stretch
when memories only seem to last a moment, an hour, a day.
“Well?” snaps the woman.
Addie’s hand closes around the copper coins. She is
careful to draw out only three, and the woman snatches
them as fast as a crow stealing crusts of bread. They vanish
into the pouch at her waist.
“Can you give me a bill?” asks Addie. “Some proof, to
show I’ve paid?”
The woman scowls, clearly insulted. “I run an honest
house.”

138

“I’m sure you do,” fumbles Addie, “but you have so many
rooms to keep. It would be easy to forget which ones have
—”
“Thirty-four years I’ve run this lodge,” she cuts in, “and
never yet forgotten a face.”
It is a cruel joke, thinks Addie, as the woman turns and
shuﬄes away, leaving her to her rented room.
A week she paid for, but she knows that she will be lucky
to have a day. Knows that in the morning she will be
evicted, the matron three crowns richer, while she herself
will be out on the street.
A little bronze key rests in the lock, and Addie turns it,
relishes the solid sound, like a stone dropped into a stream.
She has nothing to unpack, no change of clothes; she casts
oﬀ the traveling coat, draws the little wooden bird from her
skirts and sets it on the windowsill. A talisman against the
dark.
She looks out, expecting to see Paris’s grand rooftops and
dazzling buildings, the tall spires, or at least the Seine. But
she has walked too far from the river, and the little window
looks out only onto a narrow alleyway, and the stone wall of
another house that could be anywhere.
Addie’s father told her so many stories of Paris. Made it
sound like a place of glamour and gold, rich with magic and
dreams waiting to be uncovered. Now she wonders if he
ever saw it, or if the city was nothing but a name, an easy
backdrop for princes and knights, adventurers and queens.
They have bled together in her mind, those stories,
become less a picture than a palette, a tone. Perhaps the
city was less splendid. Perhaps there were shadows mixed in
with the light.
It is a gray and humid night, the sounds of merchants and
horse-carts muted by the soft rain beginning to fall, and
Addie curls up on the narrow bed and tries to sleep.

139

She thought at least she’d have the night, but the rain
hasn’t even stopped, the darkness barely settled when the
woman bangs upon her door, and a key is thrust into the
lock, and the tiny room is plunged into noise. Rough hands
haul Addie from the bed. A man grips her arm as the woman
sneers and says, “Who let you in?”
Addie ﬁghts to wipe away the dregs of sleep.
“You did,” she says, wishing the woman had only
swallowed her pride and given a receipt, but all Addie has is
the key, and before she can show it, the woman’s bony
hand cuts hard across her cheek.
“Don’t lie, girl,” she says, sucking her teeth. “This isn’t a
charity house.”
“I paid,” says Addie, cupping her face, but it is no use.
The three sols in the pouch at the woman’s waist will not
serve as proof. “We spoke, you and I. Thirty-four years you
said you’ve run this house—”
For an instant, uncertainty ﬂashes across the woman’s
face. But it is too brief, too ﬂeeting. Addie will one day learn
to ask for secrets, details only a friend or intimate would
know, but even then it will not always gain their favor. She
will be called a trickster, a witch, a spirit, and a madwoman.
Will be cast out for a dozen diﬀerent reasons, when in truth,
there is only one.
They don’t remember.
“Out,” orders the woman, and Addie barely has time to
grab her coat before she’s forced from the room. Halfway
down the hall, she remembers the wooden bird still resting
on the windowsill, and tries to twist free, to go back for it,
but the man’s grip is ﬁrm.
She’s cast out onto the street, shaking from the sudden
violence of it all, the only consolation that before the door
swings shut, the little wooden bird is tossed out, too. It lands
on the stones beside her, one wing cracking with the force.

140

Though this time, the bird doesn’t mend itself.
It lies there, beside her, a sliver of wood chipped oﬀ like a
fallen feather as the woman vanishes back inside the house.
And Addie stiﬂes the horrible urge to laugh, not at the
humor but the madness of it, the absurd, inevitable ending
to her night.
It is very late, or very early, the city quieted and the sky a
cloudy, rain-slicked gray, but she knows the dark is
watching as she scoops up the carving, buries it in her
pocket with the last copper coin. Gets to her feet, drawing
the coat tight around her shoulders, the hem of her skirts
already damp.
Exhausted, Addie makes her way down the narrow street
and takes shelter beneath the wooden lip of an awning,
sinking down into the stone crook between buildings to wait
for dawn.
She slips into a feverish almost-sleep, and feels her
mother’s hand against her brow, the faint rise and fall of her
voice as she hums, smoothing a blanket over Addie’s
shoulders. And she knows she must be ill; that is the only
time she saw her mother gentle. Addie lingers there, holding
fast to the memory even as it fades, the harsh clop of
hooves and strain of wooden carts encroaching on her
mother’s whispering song, burying it note by note until she
jerks forward out of the haze.
Her skirts are stiﬀ with grime, stained and wrinkled from
the brief but restless sleep.
The rain has stopped, but the city looks just as dirty as it
did on her arrival.
Back home, a good storm would wash the world clean,
leave it smelling crisp and new.
But it seems nothing can rinse the grime from the streets
of Paris.

141

If anything, that storm has only made things worse, the
world wet and dull, puddles brown with mud and ﬁlth.
And then, amid the muck, she smells something sweet.
She follows the scent until she ﬁnds a market in full
swing, the vendors shouting prices from tables and stalls,
chickens still squawking as they’re hauled oﬀ the backs of
carts.
Addie is famished, cannot even remember the last time
she ate. Her dress doesn’t ﬁt, but it never did—she’d stolen
it from a washing line two days outside of Paris, tired of the
one she’d worn the day of her wedding. Still, it hangs no
looser now, despite the days without food or drink. She
supposes she does not need to eat, will not perish from
hunger—but tell that to her cramping stomach, her shaking
legs.
She scans the busy square, thumbs the last coin in her
pocket, loath to spend it. Perhaps she does not need to.
With so many people in the market, it should be easy to
steal what she needs. Or so she thinks, but the merchants of
Paris are as cunning as its thieves, and they keep twice as
tight a grip on every ware. Addie learns this the hard way; it
will be weeks before she learns to palm an apple, longer still
to master it without the faintest tell.
Today, she makes a clumsy eﬀort, tries to swipe a seeded
roll from a bread-baker’s cart, and is rewarded with a meaty
hand vised around her wrist.
“Thief!”
She catches a glimpse of men-at-arms weaving through
the crowd, and is ﬂooded with the fear of landing in a cell, or
stock. She is still ﬂesh and bone, has not learned yet to pick
locks, or charm men out of charges, to free herself from
shackles as easily as her face slips from their minds.
So she pleads hastily, handing over her last coin.

142

He plucks it from her, waves the men away as the sol
vanishes into his purse. Far too much for a roll, but he gives
her nothing back. Payment, he says, for trying to steal.
“Lucky I don’t take your ﬁngers,” he growls, pushing her
away.
And that is how Addie comes to be in Paris, with a crust of
bread and a broken bird, and nothing else.
She hurries from the market, slowing only when she
reaches the bank of the Seine. And then, breathless, she
tears into the roll, tries to make it last, but in moments it is
gone, like a drop of water down an empty well, her hunger
barely touched.
She thinks of Estele.
The year before, the old woman developed a ringing in
her ears.
It was always there, she said, day and night, and when
Addie asked her how she could bear the constant noise, she
shrugged.
“With time,” she said, “you can get used to anything.”
But Addie does not think she will ever get used to this.
She stares out at the boats on the river, the cathedral
rising through the curtain of mist. The glimpses of beauty
that shine like gems against the dingy setting of the blocks,
too far away and ﬂat to be real.
She stands there until she realizes she is waiting. Waiting
for someone to help. To come and ﬁx the mess she’s in. But
no one is coming. No one remembers, and if she resigns
herself to waiting, she will wait forever.
So she walks.
And as she walks, she studies Paris. Makes a note of this
house, and that road, of bridges, and carriage horses, and
the gates of a garden. Glimpses roses beyond the wall,
beauty in the cracks.

143

It will take years for her to learn the workings of this city.
To memorize the clockwork of arrondissements, step by
step, chart the course of every vendor, shop, and street. To
study the nuances of the neighborhoods and ﬁnd the
strongholds and the cracks, learn to survive, and thrive, in
the spaces between other people’s lives, make a place for
herself among them.
Eventually, Addie will master Paris.
She will become a ﬂawless thief, uncatchable and quick.
She will slip through ﬁne houses like a ﬁligreed ghost,
move through salons, and steal up onto rooftops at night
and drink pilfered wine beneath the open sky.
She will smile and laugh at every stolen victory.
Eventually—but not today.
Today, she is simply trying to distract herself from her
gnawing hunger and her stiﬂing fear. Today she is alone in a
strange city, with no money, and no past, and no future.
Someone dumps a bucket from a second-ﬂoor window,
without warning, and thick brown water splashes onto the
cobbles at her feet. Addie jumps back, trying to avoid the
worst of the splash, only to collide with a pair of women in
ﬁne dress, who look at her as if she were a stain.
Addie retreats, sinking onto a nearby step, but moments
later a woman comes out and shakes a broom, accuses her
of trying to steal away her customers.
“Go to the docks if you plan to sell your wares,” she
scolds.
And at ﬁrst, Addie doesn’t know what the woman means.
Her pockets are empty. She’s nothing to sell. But when she
says as much, the woman gives her such a look, and says,
“You’ve got a body, don’t you?”
Her face ﬂushes as she understands.
“I’m not a whore,” she says, and the woman ﬂashes a
cold smirk.

144

“Aren’t we proud?” she says, as Addie rises, turns to go.
“Well,” the woman calls after in a crow-like caw, “that pride
won’t ﬁll your belly.”
Addie pulls the coat tight about her shoulders and forces
her legs forward down the road, feeling as if they’re about
to fold, when she sees the open doors of a church. Not the
grand, imposing towers of Notre-Dame, but a small, stone
thing, squeezed between buildings on a narrow street.
She has never been religious, not like her parents. She
has always felt caught between the old gods and the new—
but meeting the devil in the woods has got her thinking. For
every shadow, there must be light. Perhaps the darkness
has an equal, and Addie could balance her wish. Estele
would sneer, but one god gave her nothing but a curse, so
the woman cannot fault her for seeking shelter with the
other.
The heavy door scrapes open, and she shuﬄes in,
blinking in the sudden dark until her eyes adjust, and she
sees the panels of stained glass.
Addie inhales, struck by the quiet beauty of the space,
the vaulted ceiling, the red and blue and green light
painting patterns on the walls. It is a kind of art, she thinks,
starting forward, when a man steps into her path.
He opens his arms, but there is no welcome in the
gesture.
The priest is there to bar her way. He shakes his head at
her arrival.
“I’m sorry,” he says, coaxing her like a stray bird back up
the aisle. “There is no room here. We’re full.”
And then she is back out on the steps of the church, the
heavy grind of the bolt sliding home, and somewhere in
Addie’s mind, Estele begins to cackle.
“You see,” she says, in her rasping way, “only new gods
have locks.”

145

Addie never decides to go to the docks.
Her feet choose for her, carry her along the Seine as the
sun sinks over the river, lead her down the steps, stolen
boots thudding on the wooden planks. It’s darker there, in
the shadow of the ships, a landscape of crates and barrels,
ropes and rocking boats. Eyes follow her. Men glance over
from their work, and women look on, lounging like cats in
the shade. They have a sickly look about them, their color
too high, their mouths painted a violent gash of red. Their
dresses tattered and dirty, and still ﬁner than Addie’s own.
She has not decided what she means to do, even when
she slips the coat from her shoulders. Even when a man
comes up to her, one hand already roving, as if testing fruit.
“How much?” he asks in a gruﬀ voice.
And she has no idea what a body is worth, or if she is
willing to sell it. When she does not answer, his hands grow
rough, his grip grows ﬁrm.
“Ten sols,” she says, and the man lets out a bark of
laughter.
“What are you, a princess?”
“No,” she answers, “a virgin.”
There were nights, back home, when Addie dreamed of
pleasure, when she conjured the stranger beside her in the
dark, felt his lips against her breasts, imagined her hand
was his as it slipped between her legs.
“My love,” the stranger said, pressing her down into the
bed, black curls tumbling into gem-green eyes.
“My love,” she breathed as he entered her, her body
parting around his solid strength. He pushed deeper, and
she gasped, biting her hand to keep from sighing too loud.
Her mother would say that a woman’s pleasure was a
mortal sin, but in those moments, Addie didn’t care. In those

146

moments, there was only the longing and the want and the
stranger, whispering against her skin as the tension
deepened, the heat building like a storm in the bowl of her
hips, and then in her mind, Adeline would pull his body
down on hers, drawing him deeper and deeper until the
storm broke, and thunder rolled through her.
But this is nothing like that.
There is no poetry to this unknown man’s grunts, no
melody or harmony, save the steady noise of thrusting as
he pushes himself against her. No rolling pleasure, only
pressure, and pain, the tightness of one thing being forced
inside another, and Addie looks up at the night sky so she
won’t have to look at his body moving, and she feels the
darkness looking back.
Then they are in the woods again, and his mouth is on
hers, blood bubbling up on her lips as he whispers.
“Done.”
The man ﬁnishes with a ﬁnal thrust, and slumps against
her, leaden, and this cannot be it, this cannot be the life
Addie traded everything for, this cannot be the future that
erased her past. Panic grips her chest but this stranger
doesn’t seem to care, or even notice. He simply straightens
up, and tosses a handful of coins onto the cobbles at her
feet. He trundles oﬀ and Addie sinks to her knees to collect
her reward, and then empties her stomach into the Seine.

When asked about her ﬁrst memories of Paris, those terrible
few months, she will say it was a season of grief blurred into
a fog. She will say she can’t remember.
But, of course, Addie remembers.
She remembers the stench of rotten food, and waste, the
brackish waters of the Seine, the ﬁgures on the docks.
Remembers moments of kindness erased by a doorway or a
147

dawn, remembers mourning her home with its fresh bread
and warm hearth, her family’s quiet melody, and Estele’s
strong beat. The life she had, the one she gave up for the
one she thought she wanted, stolen and replaced by this.
And yet, she remembers, too, how she marveled at the
city, the way the light swept through in the mornings and
evenings, the grandeur carved out between the unhewn
blocks; how, despite all the grime, and grief, and
disappointment, Paris was full of surprises. Beauty glimpsed
through cracks.
Addie remembers the brief respite of that ﬁrst fall, the
brilliant turning of leaves over footpaths, going from green
to gold like a jeweler’s showcase, before the short, sharp
plunge into winter.
Remembers the cold that gnawed at her ﬁngers and toes
before swallowing them whole. Cold, and hunger. They had
lean months in Villon, of course, when the cold snap stole
the last of a harvest, or a late freeze ruined new growth—
but this is a new kind of hunger. It rakes at her from the
inside, drags its nails along her ribs. It wears her down, and
while Addie knows it cannot kill her, the knowing does
nothing to dull the urgent ache, the fear. She has not lost an
ounce of ﬂesh, but her stomach twists, gnawing on itself,
and just as her feet refuse to callus, so her nerves refuse to
learn. There is no numbing, none of the ease that comes
with a habit. This pain is always fresh, brittle and bright, the
feeling as sharp as her memory.
And she remembers the worst, too.
Remembers the sudden freeze, the brutal chill that stole
upon the city, and the wave of sickness that blew in behind
it like a late-fall breeze, scattering mounds of dead and
dying leaves. The sound and sight of the carts rattling past,
carrying grim cargo. Addie, turning her face away, trying not
to look at the bony shapes piled carelessly in the back. She

148

pulls a stolen coat close around her as she stumbles down
the road, and dreams of summer heat, while the cold climbs
down into her bones.
She does not think she will ever be warm again. Twice
more she has gone to the docks, but the cold has forced the
callers in, to the warm shelters of brothels, and around her,
the cold snap has turned Paris cruel. The rich board
themselves up inside their homes, cling to their hearth ﬁres,
while out in the streets, the poor are whittled down by
winter. There is nowhere to hide from it—or rather, the only
spots have all been claimed.
That ﬁrst year, Addie is too tired to ﬁght for space.
Too tired to search for shelter.
Another gust whips through, and Addie folds herself
against it, eyes blurring. She shuﬄes sideways, onto a
narrow street, just to escape the violent wind, and the
sudden quiet, the breezeless peace, of the alley is like
down, soft and warm. Her knees fold. She slumps into a
corner against a set of steps, and watches her ﬁngers turn
blue, thinks she can see frost spreading over her skin, and
marvels quietly, sleepily, at her own transformation. Her
breath fogs the air in front of her, each exhale brieﬂy
blotting out the world beyond until the gray city fades to
white, to white, to white. Strange, how it seems to linger
now, a little more with every breath, as if she’s fogging up a
pane of glass. She wonders how many breaths until the
world is hidden. Erased, like her.
Perhaps it is her vision blurring.
She does not care.
She is tired.
She is so tired.
Addie cannot stay awake, and why should she try?
Sleep is such a mercy.

149

Perhaps she will wake again in spring, like the princess in
one of her father’s stories, and ﬁnd herself lying in the
grassy bank along the Sarthe, Estele nudging her with a
worn shoe and teasing her for dreaming again.

This is death.
At least, for an instant, Addie thinks it must be death.
The world is dark, the cold unable to hold back the reek of
rot, and she cannot move. But then, she remembers, she
cannot die. There is her stubborn pulse, ﬁghting to beat, and
her stubborn lungs, ﬁghting to ﬁll, and Addie realizes her
limbs aren’t lifeless at all, but weighted down on every side.
Heavy sacks above, below, and panic ﬂutters through her,
but her mind is still sluggish with sleep. She twists, and the
sacks shift a little on top of her. The dark splits, and a sliver
of gray light shines through.
Addie writhes and wriggles until she frees one arm and
then the other, drawing them in against her body. She
begins to push up through the sacks, and only then does
she feel bones beneath the cloth, only then does her hand
meet waxy skin, only then do her ﬁngers tangle in the
strands of someone else’s hair, and now she is awake, so
awake, scrambling, tearing, desperate to get free.
She claws her way up, and out, hands splayed across the
bony mound of a dead man’s back. Nearby, milky eyes stare
up at her. A jaw hangs open, and Addie stumbles out of the
cart and collapses to the ground, retching, sobbing, alive.
A horrible sound tears free from her chest, a harsh cough,
something snagged halfway between a sob and a laugh.
Then, a scream, and it takes a moment for her to realize it
is not coming from her own cracked lips. A ragged woman
stands across the road, hands to her mouth in horror, and
Addie cannot even blame her.
150

What a shock it must be, to see a corpse drag itself free
from the cart.
The woman crosses herself, and Addie calls out in a
hoarse and broken voice, “I am not dead.” But the woman
only shuﬄes away and Addie turns her fury on the cart. “I
am not dead!” she says again, kicking at the wooden wheel.
“Hey!” shouts a man, holding the legs of a frail and
twisted corpse.
“Stay back,” shouts a second, gripping its shoulders.
Of course, they do not remember throwing her in. Addie
backs away as they swing the newest body up into the cart.
It lands with a sickening thud atop the others, and her
stomach churns to think she was among them, even brieﬂy.
A whip cracks, the horses shuﬄe forward, the wheels turn
on the cobbled stones, and it is not until the cart has gone,
not until Addie thrusts her trembling hands into the pockets
of her stolen coat, that she realizes they are empty.
The little wooden bird is gone.
The last of her past life, carried away with the dead.
For months, she will keep reaching for the bird, hand
drifting to her pocket the way it might to a stubborn curl, a
motion born of so much habit. She cannot seem to remind
her ﬁngers it is gone, cannot seem to remind her heart,
which stutters a little every time she ﬁnds the pocket empty.
But, there, blooming amid the sorrow, is a terrible relief.
Every moment since she left Villon, she has feared the loss
of this last token.
Now that it is gone, there is a guilty gladness tucked
among the grief.
This last, brittle thread to her old life has broken, and
Addie has been set well, and truly, and forcibly free.

151

Paris, France
July 29, 1715

IV
Dreamer is too soft a word.
It conjures thoughts of silken sleep, of lazy days in ﬁelds
of tall grass, of charcoal smudges on soft parchment.
Addie still holds on to dreams, but she is learning to be
sharper. Less the artist’s hand, and more the knife, honing
the pencil’s edge.
“Pour me a drink,” she says, holding out the bottle of
wine, and the man pries out the cork and ﬁlls two glasses
from the low shelf of the rented room. He hands her one,
and she doesn’t touch it as he throws his back in a single
swallow, downs a second before abandoning the glass and
reaching for her dress.
“Where’s the rush?” she says, guiding him back. “You’ve
paid for the room. We have all night.”
She is careful not to push him away, careful to keep the
pressure of her resistance coy. Some men, she’s found, take
pleasure in disregarding the wishes of a woman. Instead,
Addie lifts her own glass to his hungry mouth, tips the rustred contents between his lips, tries to pass the gesture oﬀ
as seduction instead of force.
He drinks deep, then knocks the glass away. Clumsy
hands paw at her front, ﬁghting with the laces and the
stays.

152

“I cannot wait to…” he slurs, but the drug in the wine is
already taking hold, and soon he trails oﬀ, his tongue going
heavy in his mouth.
He sags back onto the bed, still grasping at her dress, and
a moment later his eyes roll back and he slumps sideways,
lost to sleep before his head strikes the thin pillow.
Addie leans over and pushes until he rolls oﬀ the bed,
hitting the ﬂoor like a sack of grain. The man lets out a
muted groan, but does not wake.
She ﬁnishes his work, loosening the laces of her dress
until she can breathe again. Paris fashion—twice as tight as
country clothes, and half as practical.
She stretches out on the bed, grateful to have it to
herself, at least for the night. She does not want to think
about tomorrow, when she is forced to start again.
That is the madness of it. Every day is amber, and she is
the ﬂy trapped inside. No way to think in days or weeks
when she lives in moments. Time begins to lose its meaning
—and yet, she has not lost track of time. She cannot seem
to misplace it (no matter how she tries) and so Addie knows
what month it is, what day, what night, and so she knows it
has been a year.
A year since she ran from her own wedding.
A year since she ﬂed into the woods.
A year since she sold her soul for this. For freedom. For
time.
A year, and she has spent it learning the boundaries of
this new life.
Walking the edges of her curse like a lion in its cage. (She
has seen lions now. They came to Paris in the spring as part
of an exhibit. They were nothing like the beasts of her
imagination. So much grander, and so much less, their
majesty diminished by the dimensions of their cells. Addie
went a dozen times to see them, studied their mournful

153

gazes, looking past the visitors to the gap in the tent, the
single sliver of freedom.)
A year she’s spent bound within the prism of this deal,
forced to suﬀer but not die, starve but not waste, want but
not wither. Every moment pressed into her own memory,
while she herself slips from the minds of others with the
slightest push, erased by a closing door, an instant out of
sight, a moment of sleep. Unable to leave a mark on
anyone, or anything.
Even the man slumped on the ﬂoor.
She draws the stoppered bottle of laudanum from her
skirts, and holds it to the meager light. Three tries, and two
bottles of the precious medicine wasted before she realized
she could not drug the drinks herself, could not be the hand
that did the harm. But mix it in the bottle of wine, reset the
cork, and let them pour their own glass, and the action is no
longer hers.
See?
She is learning.
It is a lonely education.
She tips the bottle, the last of the milky substance shifting
inside the glass, and wonders if it might buy her a night of
dreamless sleep, a deep and drugged peace.
“How disappointing.”
At the sound of the voice, Addie nearly drops the
laudanum. She twists around in the small room, scouring
the dark, but cannot ﬁnd its source.
“I confess, my dear, I expected more.”
The voice seems to come from every shadow—then, from
one. It gathers in the darkest corner of the room, like smoke.
And then he steps forward into the circle cast by the candle
ﬂame. Black curls tumble across his brow. Shadows land in
the hollows of his face, and green eyes glitter with their own
internal light.

154

And for a traitorous instant, her heart lurches at the
familiar sight of her stranger, before she remembers it is
only him.
The darkness from the woods.
A year she’s lived this curse, and in that time, she’s called
for him. She’s pleaded with the night, sunk coins she could
not spare into the banks of the Seine, begged for him to
answer just so she could ask why, why, why.
Now, she throws the bottle of laudanum straight at his
head.
The shadow does not move to catch it, does not need to.
It passes straight through, shatters against the wall behind
him. He gives her a pitying smile.
“Hello, Adeline.”
Adeline. A name she thought she’d never hear again. A
name that aches like a bruise, even as her heart skips to
hear it.
“You,” she snarls.
The barest incline of his head. The curl of his smile. “Have
you missed me?”
She hurtles toward him like the stoppered bottle, throws
herself against his front, half expecting to fall through and
shatter as it did. But her hands meet ﬂesh and bone, or at
least, the illusion of it. She pounds against his chest, and it
is like striking a tree, just as hard and just as pointless.
He looks down at her, amused. “I see you have.”
She tears herself away, wants to scream, to rage, to sob.
“You left me there. You took everything from me, and you
left. Do you know how many nights I begged—”
“I heard you,” he says, and there is an awful pleasure in
the way he says it.
Addie sneers with rage. “But you never came.”
The darkness spreads his arms, as if to say, I am here
now. And she wants to strike him, useless as it is, wants to

155

banish him, cast him from this room like a curse, but she
must ask. She must know. “Why? Why did you do this to
me?”
His dark brows knit with false worry, mock concern. “I
granted your wish.”
“I asked only for more time, for a life of freedom—”
“I have given you both.” His ﬁngers trail along the
bedpost. “This past year has taken no toll—” A stiﬂed sound
escapes her throat, but he continues. “You are whole, are
you not? And uninjured. You do not age. You do not wither.
And as for freedom, is there any keener liberation than what
I’ve gifted you? A life with no one to answer to.”
“You know this isn’t what I wanted.”
“You did not know what you wanted,” he says sharply,
stepping toward her. “And if you did, then you should have
been more careful.”
“You deceived—”
“You erred,” says the darkness, closing the last space
between them. “Don’t you remember, Adeline?” His voices
drops to a whisper. “You were so brash, so brazen, tripping
over your words as if they were roots. Rambling on about all
the things you did not want.”
He is so close to her now, one hand drifting up her arm,
and she wills herself not to give him the satisfaction of
retreat, not to let him play the wolf, and force her into the
part of sheep. But it is hard. For all that he is painted as her
stranger, he is not a man. Not even human. It is only a
mask, and it does not ﬁt. She can see the thing beneath, as
it was in the woods, shapeless and boundless, monstrous,
and menacing. The darkness shimmers behind that greeneyed gaze.
“You asked for an eternity and I said no. You begged, and
pleaded, and then, do you remember what you said?” When

156

he speaks again, his voice is still his voice, but she can hear
her own, echoing through it.
“You can have my life when I am done with it. You can
have my soul when I don’t want it anymore.”
She draws back, from the words, from him, or tries to, but
this time he does not let her. The hand on her arm tightens;
the other rests like a lover’s touch behind her neck.
“Was it not in my best interest, then, to make your life
unpleasant? To press you toward your inevitable surrender?”
“You did not have to,” she whispers, hating the waver in
her voice.
“My dear Adeline,” he says, hand sliding up her neck into
her hair. “I am in the business of souls, not mercy.” His
ﬁngers tighten, forcing her head back, her gaze up to meet
his own, and there is no sweetness in his face, only a kind of
feral beauty.
“Come,” he says, “give me what I want, and the deal will
be done, this misery ended.”
A soul, for a single year of grief and madness.
A soul, for copper coins on a Paris dock.
A soul, for nothing more than this.
And yet, it would be a lie to say she does not waver. To
say that no part of her wants to give up, give in, if only for a
moment. Perhaps it is that part that asks.
“What would become of me?”
Those shoulders—the ones she drew so many times, the
ones she conjured into being—give only a dismissive shrug.
“You will be nothing, my dear,” he says simply. “But it is a
kinder nothing than this. Surrender, and I will set you free.”
If some part of her wavered, if some small part wanted to
give in, it did not last beyond a moment. There is a deﬁance
in being a dreamer.
“I decline,” she growls.

157

The shadow scowls, those green eyes darkening like cloth
soaked wet.
His hands fall away.
“You will give in,” he says. “Soon enough.”
He does not step back, does not turn to go. He is simply
gone. Swallowed by the dark.

158

New York City
March 13, 2014

V
Henry Strauss has never been a morning person.
He wants to be one, has dreamed of rising with the sun,
sipping his ﬁrst cup of coﬀee while the city is still waking,
the whole day ahead and full of promise.
He’s tried to be a morning person, and on the rare
occasion he’s managed to get up before dawn, it was a
thrill: to watch the day begin, to feel, at least for a little
while, like he was ahead instead of behind. But then a night
would go long, and a day would start late, and now he feels
like there’s no time at all. Like he is always late for
something.
Today, it is breakfast with his younger sister, Muriel.
Henry hurries down the block, his head still ringing faintly
from the night before, and he would have canceled, should
have canceled. But he’s canceled three times in the last
month alone, and he doesn’t want to be a shitty brother;
she just wants to be a good sister and that’s nice. That’s
new.
He’s never been to this place before. It’s not one of his
local haunts—though the truth is, Henry’s running out of
coﬀee shops in his vicinity. Vanessa ruined the ﬁrst. Milo the
second. The espresso at the third tasted like charcoal. So he
let Muriel pick one, and she chose a “quaint little hole in the
wall” called Sunﬂower that apparently doesn’t have a sign

159

or an address or any way to ﬁnd it except by some hipster
radar that Henry obviously lacks.
At last he spots a single sunﬂower stenciled on a wall
across the street. He jogs to make the light, bumping into a
guy on the corner, mumbles apologies (even as the other
man says it’s ﬁne, it’s ﬁne, it’s totally ﬁne). When Henry
ﬁnally ﬁnds the entrance, the hostess is halfway through
telling him there’s no space, but then she looks up from the
podium, and smiles, and says she’ll make it work.
Henry looks around for Muriel, but she’s always
considered time a ﬂexible concept, so even though he’s
late, she’s deﬁnitely later. And he’s secretly glad, for once,
because it gives him a moment to breathe, to smooth his
hair and wrest himself free of the scarf that’s trying to
strangle him, even order a coﬀee. He tries to make himself
look presentable, even if it doesn’t matter what he does; it
won’t change what she sees. But it still matters. It has to.
Five minutes later, Muriel sweeps in. She is, as usual, a
tornado of dark curls and unshakable conﬁdence.
Muriel Strauss, who at twenty-four only ever talks about
the world in terms of conceptual authenticity and creative
truth, who’s been a darling of the New York art scene since
her ﬁrst semester at Tisch, where she quickly realized she
was better at critiquing art than creating it.
Henry loves his sister, he does. But Muriel’s always been
like strong perfume.
Better in small doses. And at a distance.
“Henry!” she shouts, shedding her coat and dropping into
the seat with a dramatic ﬂourish.
“You look great,” she says, which isn’t true, but he simply
says, “You too, Mur.”
She beams, and orders a ﬂat white, and Henry braces for
an awkward silence, because the truth is, he has no idea
how to talk to her. But if Muriel’s good at anything, it’s

160

holding up a conversation. So he drinks his black coﬀee and
settles in while she rolls through the latest pop-up gallery
drama, then her schedule for Passover, raves about an
experiential art festival on the High Line, even though it
isn’t open yet. It isn’t until after she ﬁnishes a rant on a
piece of street art that was deﬁnitely not a pile of trash, but
in fact a commentary on capitalist waste, to the echo of
Henry’s mhm’s, and nods, that Muriel brings up their older
brother.
“He’s been asking about you.”
This is a thing Muriel has never said. Not about David;
never to Henry.
So he cannot help himself. “Why?”
His sister rolls her eyes. “I imagine it’s because he cares.”
Henry nearly chokes on his drink.
David Strauss cares about a lot of things. He cares about
his status as the youngest head surgeon at Sinai. He cares,
presumably, about his patients. He cares about making time
for Midrash, even if it means he has to do it in the middle of
a Wednesday night. He cares about his parents, and how
proud they are of what he’s done. David Strauss does not
care about his younger brother, except for the myriad ways
in which he’s ruining the family reputation.
Henry looks down at his watch, even though it doesn’t tell
the time, or any time, for that matter.
“Sorry, sis,” he says, scraping back his chair. “I’ve got to
open the store.”
She cuts herself oﬀ—something she never used to do—
and rises from the chair to wrap her arms around his waist,
squeezing him tight. It feels like an apology, like aﬀection,
like love. Muriel is a good ﬁve inches shorter than Henry,
enough that he could rest his chin on her head, if they were
that kind of close, which they’re not.

161

“Don’t be a stranger,” she says, and Henry promises he
won’t.

162

New York City
March 13, 2014

VI
Addie wakes to someone touching her cheek.
The gesture is so gentle, at ﬁrst she thinks she must be
dreaming, but then she opens her eyes, and sees the fairy
lights on the roof, sees Sam crouched beside the lawn chair,
a worried crease across her forehead. Her hair has been set
free, a mane of wild blond curls around her face.
“Hey, Sleeping Beauty,” she says, tucking a cigarette
back into its box, unlit.
Addie shivers and sits up, pulling the jacket tight around
her. It’s a cold, cloudy morning, the sky a stretch of sunless
white. She didn’t mean to sleep this long, this late. Not that
she has anywhere to be, but it certainly seemed like a
better idea last night, when she could feel her ﬁngers.
The Odyssey has fallen oﬀ her lap. It lies facedown on the
ground, the cover slick with morning dew. She reaches to
pick it up, does her best to dust the jacket oﬀ, smooth the
pages where they got bent, or smudged.
“It’s freezing out here,” says Sam, pulling Addie to her
feet. “Come on.”
Sam always talks like that, statements in place of
questions, imperatives that sound like invitations. She pulls
Addie toward the rooftop door, and Addie is too cold to
protest, simply trails Sam down the stairs to her apartment,
pretending she doesn’t know the way.

163

The door swings open onto madness.
The hall, the bedroom, the kitchen are all stuﬀed full of
art and artifact. Only the living room—at the back of the
apartment—is spacious and bare. No sofa or tables there,
nothing but two large windows, an easel, and a stool.
“This is where I do my living,” she said, when she ﬁrst
brought Addie home.
And Addie answered, “I can tell.”
She’s crammed everything she owns into three-quarters
of the space, just to preserve the peace and quiet of the
fourth. Her friend oﬀered her a studio space at an insane
deal, but it felt cold, she said, and she needs warmth to
paint.
“Sorry,” says Sam, stepping around a canvas, over a box.
“It’s a bit cluttered right now.”
Addie has never seen it any other way. She would love to
see what Sam is working on, what put the white paint under
her nails and led to the smudge of pink just below her jaw.
But instead Addie forces herself to follow the girl around and
over and through the mess into the kitchen. Sam snaps on
the coﬀeemaker, and Addie’s eyes slide over the space,
marking the changes. A new purple vase. A stack of halfread books, a postcard from Italy. The collection of mugs,
some sprouting clean brushes, and always growing.
“You paint,” she says, nodding at the stack of canvases
leaning against the stove.
“I do,” says Sam, a smile breaking over her face.
“Abstracts, mostly. Nonsense art, my friend Jake calls it. But
it’s not really nonsense, it’s just—other people paint what
they see. I paint what I feel. Maybe it’s confusing, swapping
one sense for another, but there’s beauty in the
transmutation.”
Sam pours two cups of coﬀee, one mug green, as shallow
and wide as a bowl, the other tall and blue. “Cats or dogs?”

164

she asks, instead of “green or blue,” even though there are
no dogs or cats on either of them, and Addie says, “cats,”
and Sam hands her the tall blue cup without any
explanation.
Their ﬁngers brush, and they are standing closer than she
realized, close enough for Addie to see the streaks of silver
in the blue of Sam’s eyes, close enough for Sam to count
the freckles on her face.
“You have stars,” she says.
Déjà vu, thinks Addie, again. She wills herself to pull
away, to leave, to spare herself the insanity of repetition
and reﬂection. Instead, Addie wraps her hands around the
cup and takes a long sip. The ﬁrst note is strong and bitter,
but the second is rich and sweet.
She sighs with pleasure, and Sam ﬂashes her a brilliant
grin. “Good, right?” she says. “The secret is—”
Cacao nibs, thinks Addie.
“Cacao nibs,” says Sam, taking a long sip from her cup,
which Addie is convinced now is really a bowl. She drapes
herself over the counter, head bowed over the coﬀee as if it
were an oﬀering.
“You look like a wilted ﬂower,” teases Addie.
Sam winks and lifts her cup. “Water me, and watch me
bloom.”
Addie has never seen Sam like this, in the morning. Of
course, she’s woken up beside her, but those days were
tinged with apologies, unease. The aftermath of the absence
of memory. It is never fun to linger in those moments. Now,
though. This is new. A memory made for the ﬁrst time.
Sam shakes her head. “Sorry. I never asked your name.”
This is one of the things she loves about Sam, one of the
ﬁrst things she ever noticed. Sam lives and loves with such
an open heart, shares the kind of warmth most reserve only
for the closest people in their lives. Reasons come second to

165

needs. She took her in, she warmed her up, before she
thought to ask her name.
“Madeline,” says Addie, because it is the closest she can
get.
“Mmm,” says Sam, “my favorite kind of cookie. I’m Sam.”
“Hello, Sam,” she says, as if tasting the name for the ﬁrst
time.
“So,” says the other girl, as if the question only just
occurred to her. “What were you doing up there on the
roof?”
“Oh,” says Addie with a small, self-deprecating laugh. “I
didn’t mean to fall asleep up there. I don’t even remember
sitting down on the lawn chair. I must have been more tired
than I thought. I just moved in, 2F, and I don’t think I’m used
to all the noise. I couldn’t sleep, ﬁnally gave up and went up
there to get some fresh air and watch the sun rise over the
city.”
The lie rolls out so easily, the way paved with practice.
“We’re neighbors!” says Sam. “You know,” she adds,
setting her empty cup aside, “I’d love to paint you
sometime.”
And Addie ﬁghts the urge to say, You already have.
“I mean, it wouldn’t look like you,” Sam rambles on,
heading into the hall. Addie follows, watches her stop and
run her ﬁngers over a stack of canvases, turning through
them as if they were records in a vinyl shop.
“I’ve got this whole series I’m working on,” she says, “of
people as skies.”
A dull pang echoes through Addie’s chest, and it’s six
months ago, and they are lying in bed, Sam’s ﬁngers tracing
the freckles on her cheeks, her touch as light and steady as
a brush.
“You know,” she’d said, “they say people are like
snowﬂakes, each one unique, but I think they’re more like

166

skies. Some are cloudy, some are stormy, some are clear,
but no two are ever quite the same.”
“And what kind of sky am I?” Addie had asked then, and
Sam had stared at her, unblinking, and then brightened, and
it was the kind of brightening she had seen with a hundred
artists, a hundred times, the glow of inspiration, as if
someone switched on a light beneath their skin. And Sam,
suddenly animated, wound to life, sprang from the bed,
taking Addie with her into the living room.
An hour of sitting on the hardwood ﬂoor, wrapped in only
a blanket, listening to the murmur and scrape of Sam
mixing paint, the hiss of the brush on the canvas, and then
it was done, and when Addie came around to look at it, what
she saw was the night sky. Not the night sky as anyone else
would have painted it. Bold streaks of charcoal, and black,
and thin slashes of middle gray, the paint so thick it rose up
from the canvas. And ﬂecked across the surface, a handful
of silver dots. They looked almost accidental, like spatter
from a brush, but there were exactly seven of them, small
and distant and wide apart as stars.
Sam’s voice draws her back to the kitchen.
“I wish I could show you my favorite piece,” she’s saying
now. “It was the ﬁrst in the series. One Forgotten Night. I
sold it to this collector on the Lower East Side. It was my
ﬁrst major sale, paid my rent for three months, got me into
a gallery. Still, it’s hard, letting go of the art. I know I have to
—that whole starving artist thing is overrated—but I miss it
every day.”
Her voice dips softer.
“The crazy thing is, every one of the pieces in that series
is modeled after someone. Friends, people here in the
building, strangers I found on the street. I remember all of
them. But I can’t for the life of me remember who she was.”
Addie swallows. “You think it was a girl?”

167

“Yeah. I do. It just had this energy.”
“Maybe you dreamed her.”
“Maybe,” says Sam. “I’ve never been good at
remembering dreams. But you know…” She trails oﬀ,
staring at Addie the way she did that night in bed, beginning
to glow. “You remind me of that piece.” She puts a hand
over her face. “God, that sounds like the worst pickup line in
the world. I’m sorry. I’m going to take a shower.”
“I should get going,” says Addie. “Thanks for the coﬀee.”
Sam bites her lip. “Do you have to?”
No, she doesn’t. Addie knows she could follow Sam right
into the shower, wrap herself in a towel, and sit on the living
room ﬂoor and see what kind of painting Sam would make of
her today. She could. She could. She could fall into this
moment forever, but she knows there is no future in it. Only
an inﬁnite number of presents, and she has lived as many of
those with Sam as she can bear.
“Sorry,” she says, chest aching, but Sam only shrugs.
“We’ll see each other again,” she says with so much faith.
“After all, we’re neighbors now.”
Addie manages a pale shadow of a smile. “That’s right.”
Sam walks her to the door, and with every step, Addie
resists the urge to look back.
“Don’t be a stranger,” says Sam.
“I won’t,” promises Addie, as the door swings shut. She
sighs, leaning back against it, listens to Sam’s footsteps
retreating down the cluttered hall, before she forces herself
up, and forward, and away.
Outside, the white marble sky has cracked, letting
through thin bands of blue.
The cold has burned oﬀ, and Addie ﬁnds a café with
sidewalk seating, busy enough that the waiter only has time
to make a pass of the outside tables every ten minutes or
so. She counts the beats like a prisoner marking the pace of

168

guards, orders a coﬀee—it isn’t as good as Sam’s, all bitter,
no sweet, but it’s warm enough to keep the chill at bay. She
puts up the collar of her leather coat, and opens The
Odyssey again, and tries to read.
Here, Odysseus thinks he is heading home, to ﬁnally be
reunited with Penelope after the horrors of war, but she has
read the story enough times to know how far the journey is
from done.
She skims, translating from Greek to modern English.
I fear the sharp frost and the soaking dew together
will do me in—I’m bone-weary, about to breathe my last,
and a cold wind blows from a river on toward morning.
The waiter ducks back outside, and she glances up from
the book, watches him frown a little at the sight of the drink
already ordered and delivered, the gap in his memory where
a customer should be. But she looks like she belongs, and
that’s half the battle, really, and a moment later he turns his
attention to the couple in the doorway, waiting for a seat.
She returns to her book, but it’s no use. She’s not in the
mood for old men lost at sea, for parables of lonely lives.
She wants to be stolen away, wants to forget. A fantasy, or
perhaps a romance.
The coﬀee is cold now, anyway, and Addie stands up,
book in hand, and sets oﬀ for The Last Word to ﬁnd
something new.

169

Paris, France
July 29, 1716

VII
She stands in the shade of a silk merchant.
Across the way, the tailor’s shop bustles, the pace of
business brisk even as the day wears on. Sweat drips down
her neck as she unties and reties the bonnet, salvaged from
a gust of wind, hoping the cloth cap will be enough to pass
her oﬀ as a lady’s maid, to grant her the kind of invisibility
reserved for help. If he thinks her a maid, Bertin will not look
too close. If he thinks her a maid, he might not notice
Addie’s dress, which is simple but ﬁne, slipped from a
tailor’s model a week before, in a similar shop across the
Seine. It was a pretty thing at ﬁrst, until she snagged the
skirts on an errant nail, and someone cast a bucket of soot
too near her feet, and red wine somehow got onto one of
the sleeves.
She wishes her clothes were as resistant to change as she
appears to be. Especially because she has only the one
dress—there’s no point collecting a wardrobe, or anything
else, when you’ve nowhere to put it. (She will try, in later
years, to gather trinkets, hide them away like a magpie with
its nest, but something will always conspire to steal them
back. Like the wooden bird, lost among the bodies in the
cart. She cannot seem to hold on to much of anything for
long.)

170

At last, the ﬁnal customer steps out—a valet, one
beribboned box beneath each arm—and before anyone else
can beat her to the door, Addie darts across the street and
steps inside the tailor’s shop.
It is a narrow space: a table piled high with rolls of fabric;
a pair of dress forms modeling the latest fashions. The kind
of gowns that take at least four hands to get on, and just as
many to take oﬀ—all bolstered hips and ruﬄed sleeves and
bosoms cinched too tight to breathe. These days the ﬁne
society of Paris is wrapped like parcels, clearly not meant to
be opened.
A small bell on the door announces her arrival, and the
tailor, Monsieur Bertin, looks up at her through brows as
thick as brambles, and makes a sour face.
“I am closing,” he says curtly.
Addie ducks her head, the picture of discretion. “I am
here on behalf of Madame Lautrec.”
It is a name plucked from the breeze, overheard on a
handful of her walks, but it is the right answer. The tailor
straightens, suddenly keen. “For the Lautrecs, anything.” He
takes up a small pad, a charcoal pencil, and Addie’s own
ﬁngers twitch, a moment of grief, a longing to draw as she
so often did.
“It is strange, though,” he is saying, shaking the stiﬀness
from his hands, “that she would send a lady’s maid in place
of her valet.”
“He’s ill,” Addie answers swiftly. She is learning to lie, to
bend with the current of the conversation, follow its course.
“So she sent her lady’s maid instead. Madame wishes to
throw a dance, and is in need of a new dress.”
“But of course,” he says. “You have her measurements?”
“I do.”
He stares, waiting for her to produce a slip of paper.

171

“No,” she explains. “I have her measurements—they are
the same as mine. That’s why she sent me.”
She thinks it is a rather clever lie, but the tailor only
frowns, and turns toward a curtain at the back of the shop.
“I will get my tape.”
She catches a brief glimpse of the room beyond, a dozen
dress forms, a mountain of silks, before the curtain falls
again. But as Bertin slips away, so does she, vanishing
between the dress forms and the rolls of muslin and cotton
propped against the wall. It is not her ﬁrst visit to the shop,
and she has learned well its crevices and crooks, all the
corners large enough to hide in. Addie folds into one such
space, and by the time Bertin returns to the front of the
shop, the tape in one hand, he has forgotten all about
Madame Lautrec and her peculiar maid.
It is stuﬀy among the rolls of cloth, and she’s grateful
when she hears the rattle of the bell, the shuﬄing sound of
Bertin closing up his shop. He will go upstairs, to the room
he keeps above, will have some soup, and soak his aching
hands, and go to bed before it is full night. She waits, letting
the quiet settle around her, waits until she can hear the
groan of his steps overhead.
And then she is free to wander, and peruse.
A weak gray light seeps through the front window as she
crosses the shop, pulls aside the heavy curtain, and steps
through.
The fading light slides in through a single window, just
enough to see by. Along the back wall there are cloaks, halfﬁnished, and she makes a mental note to return when
summer gives way to fall, and the cold sweeps through. But
her focus falls on the center of the room, where a dozen
dress forms stand like dancers taking up their marks, their
narrow waists wrapped in shades of green and gray, a navy
gown piped white, another pale blue with yellow trim.

172

Addie smiles, and casts the bonnet oﬀ onto a table,
shaking loose her hair.
She runs her hand over skeins of patterned silk and richly
dyed cotton, savoring the textures of linen and twill.
Touches the boning of the corsets, the bustles at the hips,
imagining herself in each. She passes the muslin and wool,
simple and sturdy, lingers instead on worsted pleats and
layered satin, ﬁner than anything she saw back home.
Home—it is a hard word to let go of, even now, when
there is nothing left to bind her to it.
She plucks at the stays of a bodice, the blue of summer,
and stops, breath held, when she catches movement out of
the corner of her eye. But it is only a mirror, leaning against
the wall. She turns, studies herself in the silvered surface,
as if she were a portrait of someone else, though the truth
is, she looks entirely herself.
These last two years have felt like ten, and yet, they do
not show. She should have long been whittled down to skin
and bone, hardened, hewn, but her face is just as full as it
was the summer she left home. Her skin, unlined by time
and trial, untouched in any way, save for the familiar
freckles on the smooth palette of her cheeks. Only her eyes
mark the change—an edge of shadow threaded through the
brown and gold.
Addie blinks, forces her gaze away from herself, and the
dresses.
Across the room, a trio of dark shapes—men’s forms, in
trousers and waistcoats and jackets. In the low light, their
headless forms seem alive, leaning into one another as they
study her. She considers the cut of their clothes, the
absence of bone stays or bustled skirts, and thinks, not for
the ﬁrst time, and certainly not for the last, how much
simpler it would be to be a man, how easily they move
through the world, and at such little cost.

173

And then, she is reaching for the nearest form, sliding oﬀ
its coat. Unfastening the buttons down its front. There is a
strange intimacy to the undressing, and she enjoys it all the
more for the fact that the man beneath her ﬁngers is not
real, and therefore cannot grope, or paw, or push.
She frees herself from the laces of her own dress, and
ﬁnds her way into the trousers, fastening them below her
knee. She pulls on the tunic and buttons the waistcoat,
shrugs the striped coat over her shoulders, fastens the lace
cravat at her throat.
She feels safe in the armor of their fashion, but when she
turns to the mirror, her spirits sink. Her chest is too full, her
waist too narrow, her hips ﬂaring to ﬁll the trousers in the
wrong place. The jacket helps, a little, but nothing can
disguise her face. The bow of her lips, the line of her cheek,
the smoothness of her brow, all too soft and round to pass
for anything but female.
She takes up a pair of shears, tries to trim the loose coil
of her hair to her shoulders, but seconds later, it is back, the
locks on the ﬂoor swept away by some invisible hand. No
mark made, even on herself. She ﬁnds a pin and fastens the
light brown waves back in the style she has seen men wear,
plucks a tricorne hat from one of the forms and rests it
above her brow.
At a distance, perhaps; at a passing glance, perhaps; at
night, perhaps, when the darkness is thick enough to
smudge the details; but even by lamplight, the illusion does
not hold.
The men in Paris are soft, even pretty, but they are still
men.
She sighs, and casts oﬀ the disguise, and passes the next
hour trying on dress after dress, already longing for the
freedom of those trousers, the stayless comfort of that
tunic. But the dresses are ﬁne, and lush. Her favorite among

174

them is a lovely green and white—but it isn’t ﬁnished yet.
The collar and hem lie open, waiting for lace. She’ll have to
check back in a week or two, hope that she catches the
dress before it’s gone, wrapped in paper and sent on to the
home of some baroness.
In the end, Addie chooses a dark sapphire dress, its edges
trimmed in gray. It reminds her of a storm at night, the
clouds blotting out the sky. The silk kisses her skin, the
fabric crisp and new and utterly unblemished. It is too ﬁne
for her needs, a dress for banquets, for balls, but she does
not care. And if it draws strange looks, what of it? They will
forget before they have the chance to gossip.
Addie leaves her own dress draped around the naked
form, does not bother with the bonnet, lifted from a line of
clothes that morning. She slips back through the curtain and
across the shop, skirts rustling around her, ﬁnds the spare
key Bertin keeps in the table’s top drawer, and unlocks the
door, careful to still the bell with her ﬁngers. She pulls the
door shut behind her, crouching to slip the iron key back
through the gap beneath the door, then rises and turns, only
to collide with a man standing on the street.
It is no wonder she didn’t see him; dressed in black, from
his shoes to his collar, he blends right into the dark. She is
already murmuring apologies, already backing away when
her gaze lifts, and she sees the line of his jaw, the raven
curls, the eyes, so green despite the lack of light.
He smiles down at her.
“Adeline.”
That name, it strikes like ﬂint on his tongue, sparks an
answering light behind her ribs. His gaze drifts over her new
dress. “You’re looking well.”
“I look the same.”
“The prize of immortality. As you wanted.”

175

This time she does not rise to take the bait. Does not
scream or swear or point out all the ways he’s damned her,
but he must see the struggle on her face, because he
laughs, soft and airy as a breeze.
“Come,” says the shadow, oﬀering his arm. “I will walk
you.”
He does not say that he will walk her home. And if it were
midday, she would scorn the oﬀer just to spite him. (Of
course, if it were midday, the darkness would not be there.)
But it is late, and only one kind of woman walks alone at
night.
Addie has learned that women—at least, women of a
certain class—never venture forth alone, even during the
day. They are kept inside like potted plants, tucked behind
the curtains of their homes. And when they do go out, they
go in groups, safe within the cages of each other’s
company, and always in the light of day.
To walk alone in the morning is a scandal, but to walk
alone at night, that is something else. Addie knows. She has
felt their looks, their judgment, from every side. The women
scorn her from their windows, the men try to buy her on the
streets, and the devout, they try to save her soul, as if she
hasn’t already sold it. She has said yes to the church, on
more than one occasion, but only for the shelter, and never
the salvation.
“Well?” asks the shadow, holding out his arm.
Perhaps she is lonelier than she would say.
Perhaps an enemy’s company is still better than none.
Addie does not take his arm, but she does start walking,
and she does not need to look to know that he has fallen in
step beside her. His shoes echo softly on the cobblestones,
and a faint breeze presses like a palm against her back.
They walk in silence, until she cannot bear it. Until her
resolve slips, and she looks over, and sees him, head tipped

176

slightly back, dark lashes brushing fair cheeks as he
breathes in the night, fetid though it is. A faint smile on
those lips, as if he’s perfectly at ease. His very image mocks
her, even as his edges blur, dark into dark, smoke on
shadow, a reminder of what he is, and what he isn’t.
Her silence cracks, the words spill out.
“You can take any shape you please, isn’t that right?”
His head tips down. “It is.”
“Then change,” she says. “I cannot bear to look at you.”
A rueful smile. “I rather like this form. I think you do as
well.”
“I did once,” she says. “But you have ruined it for me.”
It is an opening, she sees too late, a crack in her own
armor.
Now he will never change.
Addie stops on a narrow, winding street, before a house, if
it can be called that. A slumping wooden structure, like a
pile of kindling, deserted, abandoned, but not empty.
When he is gone, she will climb through the gap in the
boards, trying not to ruin the hem of her new skirts, will
cross the uneven ﬂoor and go up a set of broken stairs to
the attic, and hope that no one else has found it ﬁrst.
She will climb out of her storm-cloud dress, and fold it
carefully within a piece of tissue paper, and then she will lie
down on a pallet of burlap and board, and stare up through
the split planks of the ceiling two feet over her head, and
hope it does not rain, while the lost souls creep through the
body of the house below.
Tomorrow, the little room will be taken, and in a month,
the building will burn down, but there is no sense worrying
about the future now.
The darkness shifts like a curtain at her back.
“How long will you carry on?” he muses. “What is the
point of dragging yourself through another day, when there

177

is no reprieve?”
Questions she has asked herself in the dead of night,
moments of weakness when winter sank its teeth into her
skin, or hunger clawed against her bones, when a space was
taken, a day’s work undone, a night’s peace lost, and she
could not bear the thought of rising to do it all again. And
yet, hearing the words parroted back like this, in his voice
instead of hers, they lose a measure of their venom.
“Don’t you see?” he says, green eyes sharp as broken
glass. “There is no end besides the one I oﬀer. All you have
to do is yiel—”
“I saw an elephant,” says Addie, and the words are like
cold water on coals. The darkness stills beside her, and she
continues, gaze ﬁxed on the ramshackle house, and the
broken roof, and the open sky above. “Two, in fact. They
were in the palace grounds, as part of some display. I didn’t
know animals could be so large. And there was a ﬁddler in
the square the other day,” she presses on, her voice steady,
“and his music made me cry. It was the prettiest song I’d
ever heard. I had Champagne, drank it straight from the
bottle, and watched the sun set over the Seine while the
bells rang out from Notre-Dame, and none of it would have
happened back in Villon.” She turns to look at him. “It has
only been two years,” she says. “Think of all the time I have,
and all the things I’ll see.”
Addie grins at the shadow then, a small, feral smile, all
teeth, feasting on the way the humor falls from his face.
It is a small victory, and yet so sweet, to see him falter,
even for an instant.
And then, suddenly, he is too close, the air between them
snuﬀed like a candle. He smells of summer nights, of earth,
and moss, and tall grass waving beneath stars. And of
something darker. Of blood on rocks, and wolves loose in
the woods.

178

He leans in until his cheek brushes against hers, and
when he speaks again, the words are little more than
whispers over skin.
“You think it will get easier,” he says. “It will not. You are
as good as gone, and every year you live will feel a lifetime,
and in every lifetime, you will be forgotten. Your pain is
meaningless. Your life is meaningless. The years will be like
weights around your ankles. They will crush you, bit by bit,
and when you cannot stand it, you will beg me to put you
from your misery.”
Addie pulls back to face the darkness, but he is already
gone.
She stands alone on the narrow road. Inhales a low,
unsteady breath, forces it out again, and then straightens,
and smooths her skirts, and makes her way into the broken
house that, tonight at least, is home.

179

New York City
March 13, 2014

VIII
The bookshop is busier today.
A kid plays hide-and-seek with his imaginary friend while
his father turns through a military history. A college student
crouches, scanning the diﬀerent editions of Blake, and the
boy she met yesterday stands behind the counter.
She studies him, the habit like thumbing through a book.
His black hair tumbles forward into his eyes, unruly,
untamable. He pushes it back, but in seconds it has fallen
forward again, making him look younger than he is.
He has the kind of face, she thinks, that can’t keep
secrets well.
There is a short queue, so Addie hangs back between
POETRY and MEMOIR. She raps her nails along a shelf, and a few
moments later an orange head pokes itself out from the
dark above the spines. She pets Book absently, and waits
for the queue to thin from three, to two, to one.
The boy—Henry—notices her, lingering nearby, and
something crosses his face, too fast for even her to read,
before his attention ﬂicks back to the woman at the counter.
“Yes, Ms. Kline,” he’s saying. “No, that’s ﬁne. And if it’s
not what he wants, just bring it back.”
The woman toddles oﬀ, clutching her store bag, and
Addie steps up. “Hi there,” she says brightly.

180

“Hello,” Henry says, an edge of caution in his voice. “Can
I help you?”
“I hope so,” she says, all practiced charm. She sets The
Odyssey on the counter between them. “My friend bought
me this book, but I already have it. I was hoping I could
exchange it for something else.”
He studies her. A dark brow lifts behind his glasses. “Are
you serious?”
“I know,” she says with a laugh, “hard to believe I already
own this one in Greek but—”
He rocks back on his heels. “You are serious.”
Addie falters, thrown oﬀ by the edge in his voice. “I just
thought it was worth asking…”
“This isn’t a library,” he chides. “You can’t just trade one
book for another.”
Addie straightens. “Obviously,” she says, a little
indignant. “But like I said, I didn’t buy it. My friend did, and I
just heard you tell Ms. Kline that—”
His face hardens, the ﬂat regard of a door slammed shut.
“Word of advice. Next time you try to return a book, don’t
return it to the same person you stole it from the ﬁrst time.”
A rock drops inside her chest. “What?”
He shakes his head. “You were just in here yesterday.”
“I wasn’t—”
“I remember you.”
Three words, large enough to tip the world.
I remember you.
Addie lurches as if struck, about to fall. She tries to right
herself. “No you don’t,” she says ﬁrmly.
His green eyes narrow. “Yes. I do. You came in here
yesterday, green sweater, black jeans. You stole this used
copy of The Odyssey, which I gave back to you, because
who steals a used copy of The Odyssey in Greek anyways,
and then you have the nerve to come back in here and try

181

to trade it out for something else? When you didn’t even
buy the ﬁrst one…”
Addie closes her eyes, vision swimming.
She doesn’t understand.
She can’t—
“Now look,” he says, “I think you better go.”
She opens her eyes, and sees him pointing to the door.
Her feet won’t move. They refuse to carry her away from
those three words.
I remember you.
Three hundred years.
Three hundred years, and no one has said those words,
no one has ever, ever remembered. She wants to grab him
by the sleeve, wants to pull him forward, wants to know
why, how, what is so special about a boy in a bookstore—
but the man with the military history is waiting to pay, the
kid clinging to his leg, and the boy with the glasses is
glaring at her, and this is all wrong. She grips the counter,
feels like she might faint. His eyes soften, just a fraction.
“Please,” he says under his breath. “Just go.”
She tries.
She can’t.
Addie gets as far as the open door, the four short steps
from the shop to the street, before something in her gives.
She slumps onto the lip at the top of the stairs, puts her
head in her hands, feels like she might cry, or laugh, but
instead, she stares back through the beveled glass insert of
the shop door. She watches the boy every time he comes
into the frame. She cannot tear her eyes away.
I remember you. I remember you. I remember you. I
remember you. I remember you. I remember you. I
remember you. I remember you. I remember you. I
remember you. I remember you. I remember you. I

182

remember you. I remember you. I remember you. I
remember—
“What are you doing?”
She blinks, and sees him standing in the open doorway,
arms crossed. The sun has shifted lower in the sky, the light
going thin.
“Waiting for you,” she says, cringing as soon as she says
it. “I wanted to apologize,” she continues. “For the whole
book thing.”
“It’s ﬁne,” he says curtly.
“No, it’s not,” she says, rising to her feet. “Let me buy
you a coﬀee.”
“You don’t have to do that.”
“I insist. As an apology.”
“I’m working.”
“Please.”
And it must be something in the way she says it, the
sheer mix of hope and need, the obvious fact it means more
than a book, more than a sorry, that makes the boy look her
in the eyes, makes her realize that he hadn’t really, not until
now. There’s something strange, searching in his gaze, but
whatever he sees when he looks at her, it changes his mind.
“One coﬀee,” he says. “And you’re still banned from the
shop.”
Addie feels the air rush back into her lungs. “Deal.”

183

New York City
March 13, 2014

IX
Addie lingers on the bookstore steps for an hour until it
closes.
Henry locks up, and turns to see her sitting there, and
Addie braces again for the blankness in his gaze, the
conﬁrmation that their earlier encounter was only some
strange glitch, a slipped stitch in the centuries of her curse.
But when he looks at her, he knows her. She is certain he
knows her.
His brows go up beneath his tangled curls, as if he’s
surprised that she’s still there. But his annoyance has given
way to something else—something that confuses her even
more. It’s less hostile than suspicion, more guarded than
relief, and it is still wonderful, because of the knowing in it.
Not a ﬁrst meeting, but a second—or rather, a third—and for
once she is not the only one who knows.
“Well?” he says, holding out his hand, not for her to take,
but for her to lead the way, and she does. They walk a few
blocks in awkward silence, Addie stealing glances that tell
her nothing but the line of his nose, the angle of his jaw.
He has a starved look, wolﬁsh and lean, and even though
he’s not unnaturally tall, he hunches his shoulders as if to
make himself shorter, smaller, less obtrusive. Perhaps, in
the right clothes, perhaps, with the right air, perhaps,

184

perhaps; but the longer she looks at him, the weaker the
resemblance to that other stranger.
And yet.
There is something about him that keeps catching her
attention, snagging it the way a nail snags a sweater.
Twice he catches her looking at him, and frowns.
Once she catches him stealing his own glance, and
smiles.
At the coﬀee shop, she tells him to grab a table while she
buys the drinks, and he hesitates, as if torn between the
urge to pay and the fear of being poisoned, before
retreating to a corner booth. She orders him a latte.
“Three eighty,” says the girl behind the counter.
Addie cringes at the cost. She pulls a few bills from her
pocket, the last of what she took from James St. Clair. She
doesn’t have the cash for two drinks, and she can’t just walk
out with them, because there’s a boy waiting. And he
remembers.
Addie glances toward the table, where he sits, arms
folded, staring out the window.
“Eve!” calls the barista.
“Eve!”
Addie startles, realizing that means her.
“So,” says the boy when she sits down. “Eve?”
No, she thinks. “Yeah,” she says. “And you’re…”
Henry, she thinks just before he says it.
“Henry.” It ﬁts him, like a coat. Henry: soft, poetic. Henry:
quiet, strong. The black curls, the pale eyes behind their
heavy frames. She has known a dozen Henrys, in London,
Paris, Boston, and L.A., but he is not like any of them.
His gaze drops to the table, his cup, her empty hands.
“You didn’t get anything.”
She waves it away. “I’m not really thirsty,” she lies.
“It feels weird.”

185

“Why?” She shrugs. “I said I’d buy you a coﬀee. Besides,”
she hesitates, “I lost my wallet. I didn’t have enough for
two.”
Henry frowns. “Is that why you stole the book?”
“I didn’t steal it. I wanted to trade. And I said sorry.”
“Did you?”
“With the coﬀee.”
“Speaking of,” he says, standing. “How do you take it?”
“What?”
“The coﬀee. I can’t sit here and drink alone, it makes me
feel like an asshole.”
She smiles. “Hot chocolate. Dark.”
Those brows quirk up again. He walks away to order, says
something that makes the barista laugh and lean forward,
like a ﬂower to the sun. He returns with a second cup and a
croissant, and sets them both in front of her before taking
his seat, and now they are uneven again. Balance tipped,
restored, and tipped again, and it is the kind of game she’s
played a hundred times, a sparring match made of small
gestures, the stranger smiling across the table.
But this is not her stranger, and he is not smiling.
“So,” says Henry, “what was all that today, with the
book?”
“Honestly?” Addie wraps her hands around the coﬀee
cup. “I didn’t think you’d remember.”
The question rattles like loose change in her chest, like
pebbles in a porcelain bowl; it shakes inside her, threatening
to spill out.
How did you remember? How? How?
“The Last Word doesn’t get that many customers,” Henry
says. “And even fewer try to leave without paying. I guess
you made an impression.”
An impression.
An impression is like a mark.

186

Addie runs her ﬁngers through the foam on her hot
chocolate, watches the milk smooth again in her wake.
Henry doesn’t notice, but he noticed her, he remembered.
What is happening?
“So,” he says, but the sentence goes nowhere.
“So,” she echoes, because she cannot say what she
wants. “Tell me about yourself.”
Who are you? Why are you? What is happening?
Henry bites his lip and says, “Not much to tell.”
“Did you always want to work in a bookshop?”
Henry’s face turns wistful. “I’m not sure it’s the job that
people dream of, but I like it.” He’s lifting the latte to his
mouth when someone shuﬄes past, knocking against his
chair. Henry rights the cup in time, but the man begins to
apologize. And doesn’t stop.
“Hey, I’m so sorry.” His face twists with guilt.
“It’s ﬁne.”
“Did I make you spill?” asks the man with genuine
concern.
“Nope,” says Henry. “You’re good.”
If he registers the man’s intensity, he gives no sign. His
focus stays ﬁrmly on Addie, as if he can will the man away.
“That was weird,” she says, when he’s ﬁnally gone.
Henry only shrugs. “Accidents happen.”
That isn’t what she meant. But the thoughts are passing
trains, and she can’t aﬀord to be derailed.
“So,” she says, “the bookshop. Is it yours?”
Henry shakes his head. “No. I mean, it might as well be,
I’m the only employee, but it belongs to a woman named
Meredith, who spends most of her time on cruises. I just
work there. What about you? What do you do when you’re
not stealing books?”
Addie weighs the question, the many possible answers, all
of them lies, and settles for something closer to the truth.

187

“I’m a talent scout,” she says. “Music, mostly, but also
art.”
Henry’s face hardens. “You should meet my sister.”
“Oh?” asks Addie, wishing she’d lied. “Is she an artist?”
“I think she’d say she fosters art, that it’s a type of artist,
maybe. She likes to”—he makes a ﬂourish—“nurture the raw
potential, shape the narrative of the creative future.”
Addie thinks she would like to meet his sister, but she
doesn’t say it.
“Do you have siblings?” he asks.
She shakes her head, tearing a corner oﬀ the croissant
because he hasn’t touched it, and her stomach’s growling.
“Lucky,” he says.
“Lonely,” she counters.
“Well, you’re welcome to mine. There’s David, who’s a
doctor, a scholar, and a pretentious asshole, and Muriel
who’s, well—Muriel.”
He looks at her, and there it is again, that strange
intensity, and maybe it’s just that so few people make eye
contact in the city, but she can’t shake the feeling he’s
looking for something in her face.
“What is it?” she asks, and he starts to say one thing, but
changes course.
“Your freckles look like stars.”
Addie smiles. “I’ve heard. My own little constellation. It’s
the ﬁrst thing everyone sees.”
Henry shifts in his seat. “What do you see,” he says,
“when you look at me?”
His voice is light enough, but there is something in the
question, a weight, like a stone buried in a snowball. He’s
been waiting to ask. The answer matters.
“I see a boy with dark hair and kind eyes and an open
face.”
He frowns a little. “Is that all?”

188

“Of course not,” she says. “But I don’t know you yet.”
“Yet,” he echoes, and there’s something like a smile in his
voice.
She purses her lips, considers him again.
For a moment, they are the only silent spot in the bustling
café.
Live long enough, and you learn how to read a person. To
ease them open like a book, some passages underlined and
others hidden between the lines.
Addie scans his face, the slight furrow where his brows go
in and up, the set of his lips, the way he rubs one palm as if
working out an ache, even as he leans forward, and in, his
attention wholly on her.
“I see someone who cares,” she says slowly. “Perhaps too
much. Who feels too much. I see someone lost, and hungry.
The kind of person who feels like they’re wasting away in a
world full of food, because they can’t decide what they
want.”
Henry stares at her, all the humor gone out of his face,
and she knows she’s gotten too close to the truth.
Addie laughs nervously, and the sound rushes back in
around them. “Sorry,” she says, shaking her head. “Too
deep. I probably should have just said you were goodlooking.”
Henry’s mouth quirks, but the smile doesn’t reach his
eyes. “At least you think I’m good-looking.”
“What about me?” she asks, trying to break the sudden
tension.
But for the ﬁrst time, Henry won’t look her in the eyes.
“I’ve never been good at reading people.” He nudges the
cup away, and stands, and Addie thinks she’s ruined it. He’s
leaving.
But then he looks down at her and says, “I’m hungry. Are
you hungry?”

189

And the air rushes back into her lungs.
“Always,” she says.
And this time, when he holds out his hand, she knows
he’s inviting her to take it.

190

Paris, France
July 29, 1719

X
Addie has discovered chocolate.
Harder to come by than salt, or Champagne, or silver, and
yet the marchioness keeps an entire tin of the dark, sweet
ﬂakes beside her bed. Addie wonders, as she holds a
melting sliver on her tongue, if the woman counts the
pieces every night, or if she only notices when her ﬁngers
skim the empty bottom of the tin. She is not home to ask. If
she were, Addie wouldn’t be sprawled atop her down duvet.
But Addie and the lady of the house have never met.
Hopefully, they never will.
The marquis and his wife keep quite a social calendar,
after all, and over the last few years their city house has
become one of her favorite haunts.
Haunt—it is the right word, for someone living like a
ghost.
Twice a week they have friends to dinner in their city
house, and every fortnight they host a grander party there,
and once a month, which happens to be tonight, they take a
carriage across Paris to play cards with other noble families,
and do not return until the early morning.
By now, the servants have retreated to their own
quarters, no doubt to drink and savor their small measure of
freedom. They will take shifts, so that at any given time, a
single sentinel stands watch at the base of the stairs, while

191

the rest enjoy their peace. Perhaps they play cards, too. Or
perhaps they simply relish the quiet of an empty house.
Addie rests another bit of chocolate on her tongue and
sinks back onto the marchioness’s bed, into the cloud of airy
down. There are more cushions here than in all of Villon, she
is certain, and each is twice as full of feathers. Apparently
nobles are made of glass, designed to break if laid upon too
rough a surface. Addie spreads her arms, like a child making
angels in the snow, and sighs with pleasure.
She spent an hour or so combing over and through the
marchioness’s many dresses, but she doesn’t have enough
hands to climb into any of them, so she has wrapped herself
in a blue silk dressing gown ﬁner than anything she’s ever
owned. Her own dress, a rust-colored thing with a cream
lace trim, lies abandoned on the chaise, and when she looks
at it she remembers the wedding gown, cast-oﬀ in the grass
along the Sarthe, the pale white linen shed like a skin beside
her.
The memory clings like spider silk.
Addie pulls the dressing gown close, inhales the scent of
roses on the hem, closes her eyes, and imagines this is her
bed, her life, and for a few minutes, it is pleasant enough.
But the room is too warm, too still, and she’s afraid if she
lingers in the bed, it might swallow her. Or worse, she might
fall asleep, and ﬁnd herself shaken awake by the lady of the
house, and what a pain that would be, since the bedroom is
on the second ﬂoor.
It takes a full minute to climb out of the bed, hands and
knees sinking into the down as she scrambles toward the
edge, tumbles gracelessly onto the rug. She steadies herself
against a wooden post, delicate branches carved into the
oak, thinks of trees as she surveys the room, deciding how
to occupy herself. A glass door leads out onto the balcony, a

192

wooden one leads into the hall. A chest of drawers. A chaise.
A dressing table, topped by a polished mirror.
Addie sinks onto a cushioned stool before the vanity, her
ﬁngers dancing over the bottles of perfume and pots of
cream, the soft plume of a powder puﬀ, a bowl of silver
hairpins.
Of these last, she takes a handful, and begins to twist up
locks of hair, fastening the coils back and up around her
face as if she has the faintest idea what she is doing. The
current style is reminiscent of a sparrow’s nest, a bundle of
curls. At least she is not yet expected to wear a wig, one of
those monstrous, powdered things like towers of meringue
that will come into fashion ﬁfty years from now.
Her nest of curls is set, but needs a ﬁnal touch. Addie lifts
a pearl comb in the shape of a feather and slides the teeth
into the locks just behind her ear.
Strange, the way small diﬀerences add up.
Perched there on the pillowed seat, surrounded by luxury,
in her borrowed blue silk robe with her hair pinned up in
curls, Addie could almost forget herself, could almost be
someone else. A young mistress, the lady of the house, able
to move freely with the safeguard of her reputation.
Only the freckles on her cheeks stand out, a reminder of
who Addie was, is, will always be.
But freckles are easily covered.
She takes up the powder puﬀ, the bloom halfway to her
cheek when a faint breeze stirs the air, carrying the scent
not of Paris, but open ﬁelds, and a low voice says, “I would
rather see clouds blot out the stars.”
Addie’s gaze cuts to the mirror, and the reﬂection of the
room behind her. The balcony doors are still shut fast, but
the chamber is no longer empty. The shadow leans against
the wall with all the ease of someone who has been there
for a while. She is not surprised to see him—he has come,

193

year after year—but she is unsettled. She will always be
unsettled.
“Hello, Adeline,” says the darkness, and though he is
across the room, the words brush like leaves against her
skin.
She turns in her seat, free hand rising to the open collar
of her robe. “Go away.”
He clicks his tongue. “A year apart, and that is all you
have to say?”
“No.”
“What, then?”
“I mean no,” she says again. “That is my answer, to your
question. The only reason you’re here. You’ve come to ask if
I will yield, and the answer is no.”
His smile ripples, shifts. Gone is the gentleman; again, the
wolf.
“My Adeline, you’ve grown some teeth.”
“I am not yours,” she says.
A ﬂash of warning white, and then the wolf retreats,
pretends to be a man again as he steps into the light. And
yet, the shadows cling to him, smudging edges into the
dark. “I grant you immortality. And you spend your evenings
eating bonbons in other people’s beds. I imagined more for
you than this.”
“And yet, you condemned me to less. Come to gloat?”
He runs a hand along the wooden post, tracing the
branches. “Such venom on our anniversary. And here I came
only to oﬀer you dinner.”
“I see no food. And I do not want your company.”
He moves like smoke, one moment across the room and
the next beside her. “I would not be so quick to scorn,” he
says, one long ﬁnger grazing the pearl comb in her hair. “It
is the only company you’ll ever have.”

194

Before she can pull away, the air is empty; he is across
the room again, hand resting on the tassel beside the door.
“Stop,” she says, lunging to her feet, but it’s too late. He
pulls, and a moment later the bell rings, splitting the silence
of the house.
“Damn you,” she hisses as footsteps sound on the stairs.
Addie is already turning to take up her dress, to snag
what little she can before she ﬂees—but the darkness
catches her arm. He forces her to stay there at his side like
some misbehaving child as a lady’s maid opens the door.
She should startle at the sight of them, two strangers in
her master’s home, but there is no shock in the woman’s
face. No surprise, anger, or fear. There is nothing at all. Only
a kind of vacancy, a calm unique to the dreaming and the
dazed. The maid stands, head bowed and hands laced,
waiting for instruction, and Addie realizes with dawning
horror and relief that the woman is bewitched.
“We will dine in the salon tonight,” says the darkness, as
if the house were his. There is a new timbre to his voice, a
ﬁlm, like gossamer drawn over stone. It ripples in the air,
wraps itself around the maid, and Addie can feel it sliding
along her own skin, even as it fails to hold.
“Yes, sir,” says the maid with a small bow.
She turns to lead them down the stairs, and the darkness
looks to Addie and smiles.
“Come,” he says, eyes gone emerald with arrogant glee.
“I heard the marquis’s chef is one of the best in Paris.”
He oﬀers her his arm, but she does not take it.
“You don’t really expect me to dine with you.”
He lifts his chin. “You would waste such a meal, simply
because I’m at the table? I think your stomach is louder
than your pride. But suit yourself, my dear. Stay here in your
borrowed room, and glut yourself on stolen sweets. I’ll eat
without you.”

195

With that, he strides away, and she is torn between the
urge to slam the door behind him and the knowledge that
her night is ruined, whether she eats with him or not, that
even if she stays here in this room, her mind will follow him
down the stairs to dinner.
And so she goes.
Seven years from now, Addie will see a puppet show
being put on in a Paris square. A curtained cart, with a man
behind, hands raised to hold aloft the little wooden ﬁgures,
their limbs dancing up and down with twine.
And she will think of this night.
This dinner.
The servants of the house move around them as if on
strings, smooth and silent, every gesture done with that
same, sleepy ease. Chairs pulled back, linens smoothed,
bottles of Champagne uncorked and poured into waiting
crystal ﬂutes.
But the food comes out too quickly, the ﬁrst course
arriving as the glasses are ﬁlled. Whatever hold the
darkness has on the servants of this house, it began before
his entrance in her stolen room. It began before he rang the
bell, and called the maid, and summoned her to dinner.
He should seem so out of place in the ﬁligreed room. He
is, after all, a wild thing, a god of forest nights, a demon
bounded by the dark, and yet he sits with the poise and
grace of a nobleman enjoying his dinner.
Addie ﬁngers the silver cutlery, the gilt trim of the plates.
“Am I supposed to be impressed?”
The darkness looks at her across the table. “Are you not?”
he asks as the servants bow, and draw back against the
walls.
The truth is, she is scared. Unsettled by the display. She
knows his power—at least, she thought she did—but it’s one
thing to make a deal, and another to be the witness of such

196

control. What could he make them do? How far could he
make them go? Is it as easy for him as pulling strings?
The ﬁrst course is placed before her, a cream soup the
pale orange of dawn. It smells wonderful, and the
Champagne sparkles in its glass, but she does not let
herself reach for either.
The darkness reads the caution in her face.
“Come, Adeline,” he says, “I am no fae thing, here to trap
you with food and drink.”
“And yet, everything seems to have a price.”
He exhales, eyes ﬂashing a paler shade of green.
“Suit yourself,” he says, taking up his glass and drinking
deeply.
After a long moment, Addie gives in, and lifts the crystal
to her lips, taking her ﬁrst sip of Champagne. It is unlike
anything she’s ever tasted; a thousand fragile bubbles race
across her tongue, sweet and sharp, and she would melt
with pleasure, if it were any other table, any other man, any
other night.
Instead of savoring each sip, she immediately empties
her glass, and by the time she sets it on the table, her head
is ﬁzzing slightly, and the servant is already at her elbow,
pouring her a second drink.
The darkness sips his own, and watches, saying nothing
as she eats. The silence in the room grows heavy, but she
does not break it.
Instead she focuses ﬁrst on the soup, and then on ﬁsh,
and then on a round of pastry-crusted beef. It is more than
she has eaten in months, in years, and she feels full in a
way that goes beyond her stomach. And as she slows, she
studies the man, who is not a man, across the table, the
way the shadows bend in the room at his back.
This is the longest they have ever spent together.

197

Before, there were only those mere moments in the
woods, the minutes in a shoddy room, half an hour along
the Seine. But now, for the ﬁrst time, he does not loom
behind her like a shadow, does not linger like a phantom at
the edges of her sight. Now, he sits across from her, on full
display, and though she knows the static details of his face,
having drawn them a hundred times, still she cannot help
but study him in motion.
And he lets her.
There is no shyness in his manner.
He seems, if anything, to relish her attention.
As his knife slices across the plate, as he lifts a bite of
meat to his lips, his black brows lift, his mouth tugs at the
corner. Less a man than a collection of features, drawn by a
careful hand.
In time, that will change. He will inﬂate, expand to ﬁll the
gaps between the lines of her drawing, wrest the image
from her grip until she cannot fathom that it was ever hers.
But for now, the only aspect that is his—entirely his—are
those eyes.
She imagined them a hundred times, and yes, they were
always green, but in her dreams they were a single shade:
the steady green of summer leaves.
His are diﬀerent.
Startling, inconstant, the slightest change in humor, in
temper, reﬂected there, and only there.
It will take Addie years to learn the language of those
eyes. To know that amusement renders them the shade of
summer ivy, while annoyance lightens them to sour apple,
and pleasure, pleasure darkens them to the almost-black of
the woods at night, only the edges still discernible as green.
Tonight, they are the slippery color of weeds caught in the
current of a stream.
By the end of dinner, they will be another shade entirely.

198

There is something languid in his posture. He sits there,
one elbow on the tablecloth, his attention drifting, head
tipped ever so slightly as if listening to a far-oﬀ sound, while
his elegant ﬁngers trace the line of his chin as if amused by
his own form, and before she knows it, she has broken the
silence again.
“What is your name?”
His eyes slide from a corner of the room back to her.
“Why must I have one?”
“All things have names,” she says. “Names have purpose.
Names have power.” She tips her glass his way. “You know
that, or else you wouldn’t have stolen mine.”
A smile tugs at the corner of his mouth, wolﬁsh, amused.
“If it is true,” he says, “that names have power, then why
would I hand you mine?”
“Because I must call you something, to your face and in
my head. And right now I have only curses.”
The darkness does not seem to care. “Call me whatever
you like, it makes no diﬀerence. What did you call the
stranger in your journals? The man after whom you
fashioned me?”
“You fashioned yourself to mock me, and I would rather
you take any other form.”
“You see violence in every gesture,” he muses, running a
thumb over his glass. “I fashioned myself to suit you. To put
you at ease.”
Anger rises in her chest. “You have ruined the one thing I
still had.”
“How sad, that you had only dreams.”
She resists the urge to ﬂing the crystal at him, knowing it
will do no good. Instead, she looks to the servant by the
wall, holds out the glass for him to ﬁll it. But the servant
doesn’t move—none of them do. They are bound to his will,
not hers. And so she rises, and takes the bottle up herself.

199

“What was his name, your stranger?”
She returns to her seat, reﬁlls her glass, focuses on the
thousand shining bubbles that rise through the center. “He
had no name,” she says.
But it is a lie, of course, and the darkness looks at her as
if he knows it.
The truth is, she’d tried on a dozen names over the years
—Michel, and Jean, Nicolas, Henri, Vincent—and none of
them had ﬁt. And then, one night, there it was, tripping oﬀ
her tongue, when she was curled in bed, wrapped in the
image of him beside her, long ﬁngers trailing through her
hair. The name had passed her lips, simple as breath,
natural as air.
Luc.
In her mind it stood for Lucien, but now, sitting across
from this shadow, this charade, the irony is like a too-hot
drink, an ember burning in her chest.
Luc.
As in Lucifer.
The words echo through her, carried like a breeze.
Am I the devil, or the darkness?
And she does not know, will never know, but the name is
already ruined. Let him have it.
“Luc,” she murmurs.
The shadow smiles, a dazzling, cruel imitation of joy, and
lifts his drink as if to toast.
“Then Luc it is.”
Addie drains her glass again, clinging to the
lightheadedness it brings. The eﬀects won’t last, of course,
she can feel her senses ﬁghting back with every empty
glass, but she presses on, determined to best them, at least
for a while.
“I hate you,” she says.

200

“Oh, Adeline,” he says, setting down his glass. “Without
me, where would you be?” As he speaks, he turns the
crystal stem between his ﬁngers, and in its faceted
reﬂection, she sees another life—her own, and not her own
—a version where Adeline didn’t run to the woods as the
sun went down and the wedding party gathered, didn’t
summon the darkness to set her free.
In the glass, she sees herself—her old self, the one she
might have been, Roger’s children at her side and a new
baby on her hip and her familiar face gone sallow with
fatigue. Addie sees herself beside him in the bed, the space
cold between their bodies, sees herself bent over the hearth
the way her mother always was, the same frown lines, too,
ﬁngers aching too much to stitch the tears in clothes, far too
much to hold her old drawing pencils; sees herself wither on
the vine of life, and walk the short steps so familiar to every
person in Villon, the narrow road from cradle to grave—the
little church waiting, still and gray as a tombstone.
Addie sees it, and she is grateful he doesn’t ask if she
would go back, trade this for that, because for all the grief
and the madness, the loss, the hunger, and the pain, she
still recoils from the image in the glass.
The meal is done, and the servants of the house stand in
the shadows, waiting for their master’s next instruction. And
though their heads are bowed, and their faces are blank,
she cannot help but think of them as hostages.
“I wish you would send them away.”
“You are out of wishes,” he says. But Addie meets his
eyes, and holds them—it is easier, now that he has a name,
to think of him as a man, and men can be challenged—and
after a moment, the darkness sighs, and turns to the
nearest servant, and tells them to open a bottle for
themselves, and go.

201

And now they are alone, and the room seems smaller
than it was before.
“There,” says Luc.
“When the marquis and his wife come home and ﬁnd their
servants drunk, they will suﬀer for it.”
“And who will be blamed, I wonder, for the missing
chocolates in the lady’s room? Or the blue silk robe? Do you
think no one suﬀers when you steal?”
Addie bristles, heat rising to her cheeks.
“You gave me no choice.”
“I gave you what you asked for, Adeline. Time, without
constraint. Life without restriction.”
“You cursed me to be forgotten.”
“You asked for freedom. There is no greater freedom than
that. You can move through the world unhindered.
Untethered. Unbound.”
“Stop pretending you did me a kindness instead of a
cruelty.”
“I did you a deal.”
His hand comes down hard on the table as he says it,
annoyance ﬂashing yellow in his eyes, brief as lightning.
“You came to me. You pleaded. You begged. You chose the
words. I chose the terms. There is no going back. But if you
have already tired of going forward, you need only say the
words.”
And there it is again, the hatred, so much easier to hold
on to.
“It was a mistake to curse me.” Her tongue is coming
loose, and she doesn’t know if it’s the Champagne, or
simply the duration of his presence, the acclimation that
comes with time, like a body adjusting to a too-hot bath. “If
you had only given me what I asked for, I would have
burned out in time, would have had my ﬁll of living, and we

202

would, both of us, have won. But now, no matter how tired I
am, I will never give you this soul.”
He smiles. “You are a stubborn thing. But even rocks wear
away to nothing.”
Addie sits forward. “You think yourself a cat, playing with
its catch. But I am not a mouse, and I will not be a meal.”
“I do hope not.” He spreads his hands. “It’s been so long
since I had a challenge.”
A game. To him, everything is a game.
“You underestimate me.”
“Do I?” One black brow lifts as he sips his drink. “I
suppose we’ll see.”
“Yes,” says Addie, taking up her own. “We will.”
He has given her a gift tonight, though she doubts he
knows it. Time has no face, no form, nothing to ﬁght
against. But in his mocking smile, his toying words, the
darkness has given her the one thing she truly needs: an
enemy.
It is here the battle lines are drawn.
The ﬁrst shot may have been ﬁred back in Villon, when he
stole her life along with her soul, but this, this, is the
beginning of the war.

203

New York City
March 13, 2014

XI
She follows Henry to a bar that’s too crowded, too loud.
All the bars in Brooklyn are like that, too little space for
too many bodies, and the Merchant is apparently no
exception, even on a Thursday. Addie and Henry are
crammed into a narrow patio out back, bundled together
under an awning, but she still has to lean in to hear his
voice over the noise.
“Where are you from?” she starts.
“Upstate. Newburgh. You?”
“Villon-sur-Sarthe,” she says. The words ache a little in
her throat.
“France? You don’t have an accent.”
“I moved around.”
They are sharing an order of fries and a pair of happyhour beers because, he explains, a bookstore job doesn’t
pay that well. Addie wishes she could go back in and fetch
them some proper drinks, but she’s already told him the lie
about the wallet, and she doesn’t want to pull any more
tricks, not after The Odyssey.
Plus, she’s afraid.
Afraid to let him walk away.
Afraid to let him out of sight.
Whatever this is, a blip, a mistake, a beautiful dream, or a
piece of impossible luck, she’s afraid to let it go. Let him go.

204

One wrong step, and she’ll wake up. One wrong step, and
the thread will snap, the curse will shudder back into place,
and it will be over, and Henry will be gone, and she will be
alone again.
She forces herself back into the present. Enjoy it while it
lasts. It cannot last. But right here, right now—
“Penny for your thoughts,” he calls over the crowd.
She smiles. “I can’t wait for summer.” It’s not a lie. It has
been a long, damp spring, and she is tired of being cold.
Summer means hot days, and nights where the light lingers.
Summer means another year alive. Another year without—
“If you could have one thing,” cuts in Henry, “what would
it be?”
He studies her, squinting at her as if she’s a book, not a
person; something to be read. She stares back at him like
he’s a ghost. A miracle. An impossible thing.
This, she thinks, but she lifts her empty glass and says,
“Another beer.”

205

XII
Addie can account for every second of her life, but that
night, with Henry, the moments seem to bleed together.
Time slides by as they bounce from bar to bar, happy hour
giving way to dinner and then to late-night drinks, and every
time they hit the point where the evening splits, and one
road leads their separate ways and the other carries on
ahead, they choose the second road.
They stay together, each waiting for the other to say “It’s
getting late” or “I should be going,” or “See you around.”
There is some unspoken pact, an unwillingness to sever
whatever this is, and she knows why she’s afraid to break
the thread, but she wonders about Henry. Wonders at the
loneliness she sees behind his eyes. Wonders at the way the
waiters and the bartenders and the other patrons look at
him, the warmth he doesn’t seem to notice.
And then it is almost midnight, and they are eating cheap
pizza, walking side by side through the ﬁrst warm night of
spring, as the clouds stretch overhead, low and lit by the
moon.
She looks up, and so does Henry, and for a moment, only
a moment, he looks overwhelmingly, unbearably sad.
“I miss the stars,” he says.
“So do I,” she says, and his gaze drops back to her, and
he smiles.

206

“Who are you?”
His eyes have gone glassy, and the way he says who
almost sounds like how, less a question of how she’s doing
and more a question of how she’s here, and she wants to
ask him the same thing, but she has a good reason, and
he’s just a little drunk.
And simply, perfectly, normal.
But he can’t be normal.
Because normal people don’t remember her.
They’ve reached the subway. Henry stops.
“This is me.”
His hand slips free of hers, and there it is, that old familiar
fear, of endings, of something giving way to nothing, of
moments unwritten and memories erased. She doesn’t want
the night to end.
Doesn’t want the spell to break. Doesn’t—
“I want to see you again,” says Henry.
The hope ﬁlls her chest until it hurts. She’s heard those
words a hundred times, but for the ﬁrst time, they feel real.
Possible. “I want you to see me again, too.”
Henry smiles, the kind of smile that takes over an entire
face.
He pulls out his cell, and Addie’s heart sinks. She tells him
that her phone is broken, when the truth is, she’s never
needed one before. Even if she had someone to call, she
could not call them. Her ﬁngers would slip uselessly over the
screen. She has no e-mail, either, no way to send a message
of any kind, thanks to the whole thou-shalt-not-write part of
her curse.
“I didn’t know you could exist these days without one.”
“Old-fashioned,” she says.
He oﬀers to come by her place the next day. Where does
she live? And it feels as if the universe is mocking her now.

207

“I’m staying at a friend’s while they’re out of town,” she
says. “Why don’t I meet you at the store?”
Henry nods. “The store, then,” he says, backing away.
“Saturday?”
“Saturday.”
“Don’t go disappearing.”
Addie laughs, a small, brittle thing. And then he’s walking
away, he’s got a foot down the ﬁrst step, and the panic
grips her.
“Wait,” she says, calling him back. “I need to tell you
something.”
“Oh god,” Henry groans. “You’re with someone.”
The ring burns in her pocket. “No.”
“You’re in the CIA and you leave for a top-secret mission
tomorrow.”
Addie laughs. “No.”
“You’re—”
“My real name isn’t Eve.”
He pulls back, confused. “… okay.”
She doesn’t know if she can say it, if the curse will let her,
but she has to try. “I didn’t tell you my real name because,
well—it’s complicated. But I like you, and I want you to know
—to hear it from me.”
Henry straightens, sobering. “Well then, what is it?”
“It’s A—” The sound lodges, for just a second, the
stiﬀness of a muscle long since fallen to disuse. A rusty cog.
And then—it scrapes free.
“Addie.” She swallows, hard. “My name’s Addie.”
It hangs in the air between them.
And then Henry smiles. “Well, okay,” he says. “Goodnight,
Addie.”
As simple as that.
Two syllables falling from a tongue.

208

And it’s the best sound she’s ever heard. She wants to
throw her arms around him, wants to hear it again, and
again, the impossible word ﬁlling her like air, making her
feel solid.
Real.
“Goodnight, Henry,” Addie says, willing him to turn and
go, because she doesn’t think she can bring herself to turn
away from him.
She stands there, rooted to the spot at the top of the
subway steps until he’s out of sight, holds her breath and
waits to feel the thread snap, the world shudder back into
shape, waits for the fear and the loss and the knowledge
that it was just a ﬂuke, a cosmic error, a mistake, that it is
over now, that it will never happen again.
But she doesn’t feel any of those things.
All she feels is joy, and hope.
Her boot heels tap out a rhythm on the street, and even
after all these years, she half expects a second pair of shoes
to fall in step beside her own. To hear the rolling fog of his
voice, soft, and sweet, and mocking. But there is no shadow
at her side, not tonight.
The evening is quiet, and she is alone, but for once it is
not the same as being lonely.
Goodnight, Addie, Henry said, and Addie cannot help but
wonder if he has somehow broken the spell.
She smiles, and whispers to herself. “Goodnight, Ad—”
But the curse closes around her throat, the name lodging
there, as it always has.
And yet.
And yet.
Goodnight, Addie.
Three hundred years she’s tested the conﬁnes of her
deal, found the places where it gives, the subtle bend and
ﬂex around the bars, but never a way out.

209

And yet.
Somehow, impossibly, Henry has found a way in.
Somehow, he remembers her.
How? How? The question thuds with the drum of her
heart, but in this moment, Addie does not care.
In this moment, she is holding to the sound of her name,
her real name, on someone else’s tongue, and it is enough,
it is enough, it is enough.

210

Paris, France
July 29, 1720

XIII
The stage is set, the places ready.
Addie smooths the linen on the table, arranges the
porcelain plates, the cups—not crystal, but still glass—and
draws the dinner from its hamper. It is no ﬁve-course meal,
served by glamoured hands, but it is fresh and hearty fare.
A loaf of bread, still warm. A wedge of cheese. A pork
terrine. A bottle of red wine. She is proud of her collection,
prouder still of the fact she had no magic, save the curse, by
which to gather it, could not simply cut her gaze, say a
word, and will it so.
It is not only the table.
It is the room. No stolen chamber. No beggar’s hovel. A
place, for now at least, to call her own. It took two months
to ﬁnd, a fortnight to ﬁx up, but it was worth it. From the
outside it is nothing: cracked glass and warping wood. And
it’s true, the lower ﬂoors have fallen into disrepair, home
now only to rodents and the occasional stray cats—and, in
winter, crowded with bodies seeking any form of shelter—
but it is the height of summer now, and the city’s poor have
taken to the streets, and Addie has claimed the top ﬂoor for
herself. Boarded up the stairs and carved a way in and out
through an upper window, like a child in a wooden fort. It is
an unconventional entrance, but it is worth it for the room
beyond, where she has made herself a home.

211

A bed, piled high with blankets. A chest, ﬁlled with stolen
clothes. The windowsill brims with trinkets, glass and
porcelain and bone, gathered and assembled like a line of
makeshift birds.
In the middle of the narrow room, a pair of chairs set
before a table covered in pale linen. And in its center, a
bundle of ﬂowers, picked in the night from a royal garden
and smuggled out in the folds of her skirt. And Addie knows
none of it will last, it never does—a breeze will somehow
steal away the totems on her mantel; there will be a ﬁre, or
a ﬂood; the ﬂoor will give way or the secret home will be
found and claimed by someone else.
But she has guarded the pieces this past month, gathered
and arranged them one by one to make a semblance of a
life, and if she’s being honest, it is not only for herself.
It is for the darkness.
It is for Luc.
Or rather, it is to spite him, to prove that she is living, she
is free. That Addie will give him no hold, no way to mock her
with his charity.
The ﬁrst round was his, but the second will be hers.
And so she has made her home, and readied it for
company, fastened up her hair and dressed herself in russet
silk, the color of fall leaves, even cinched herself into a
corset despite her loathing of bone stays.
She has had a year to plan, to design the posture she will
strike, and as she straightens up the room she turns barbs
over in her mind, sharpening the weapons of their
discourse. She imagines his thrusts, and her parries, the
way his eyes will lighten or darken as the conversation
turns.
You have grown teeth, he said, and Addie will show him
how sharp they have become.

212

The sun has gone down now, and all that’s left to do is
wait. An hour passes, and her stomach growls with want as
the bread goes cold in its cloth, but she doesn’t allow
herself to eat. Instead, she leans out the window and
watches the city, the shifting lights of lanterns being lit.
And he doesn’t come.
She pours herself a glass of wine, and paces, as the
stolen candles drip, and wax pools on the table linen, and
the night grows heavy, the hours ﬁrst late, and then early.
And still he doesn’t come.
The candles gutter and snuﬀ themselves out, and Addie
sits in the dark as the knowledge settles over her.
The night has passed, the ﬁrst threads of daylight
creeping into the sky, and it is tomorrow now, and their
anniversary is over, and ﬁve years have become six without
his presence, without his face, without his asking if she’s
had enough, and the world slips, because it is unfair, it is
cheating, it is wrong.
He was supposed to come, that was the nature of their
dance. She did not want him there, has never wanted it, but
she expected it, he has made her expect it. Has given her a
single threshold on which to balance, a narrow precipice of
hope, because he is a hated thing, but a hated thing is still
something. The only thing she has.
And that is the point, of course.
That is the reason for the empty glass, the barren plate,
the unused chair.
She gazes out the window, and remembers the look in his
eyes when they toasted, the curve of his lips when they
declared war, and realizes what a fool she is, how easily
baited.
And suddenly, the whole tableau seems gruesome and
pathetic, and Addie can’t bear to look at it, can’t breathe in
her red silk. She tears at the laces of the corset, pulls the

213

pins from her hair, frees herself from the conﬁnes of the
dress, sweeps the settings from the table, and dashes the
now empty bottle against the wall.
Glass bites into her hand, and the pain is sharp, and real,
the sudden scald of a burn without the lasting scar, and she
does not care. In moments, her cuts have already closed.
The glasses and bottle lie whole. Once she thought it was a
blessing, this inability to break, but now, the impotence is
maddening.
She ruins everything, only to watch it shudder, mocking,
back together, return like a set to the beginning of the show.
And Addie screams.
Anger ﬂares inside her, hot and bright, anger at Luc, and
at herself, but it is giving way to fear, and grief, and terror,
because she must face another year alone, a year without
hearing her name, without seeing herself reﬂected in
anyone’s eyes, without a night’s respite from this curse, a
year, or ﬁve, or ten, and she realizes then how much she’s
leaned on it, the promise of his presence, because without
it, she is falling.
She sinks to the ﬂoor among the ruins of her night.
It will be years before she sees the sea, the waves
crashing against the jagged white cliﬀs, and then she will
remember Luc’s goading words.
Even rocks wear away to nothing.
Addie falls asleep just after dawn, but it is ﬁtful, and brief,
and full of nightmares, and when she wakes to see the sun
high over Paris, she cannot bring herself to rise. She sleeps
all the day and half the night, and when she wakes the
shattered thing in her has set again, like a badly broken
bone, some softness hardened.
“Enough,” she tells herself, rising to her feet.
“Enough,” she repeats, feasting on the bread, now stale,
the cheese, wilted from the heat.

214

Enough.
There will be other dark nights, of course, other wretched
dawns, and her resolve will always weaken a little as the
days grow long, and the anniversary draws near, and
treacherous hope slips in like a draft. But the sorrow has
faded, replaced by stubborn rage, and she resolves to kindle
it, to shield and nurture the ﬂame until it takes far more
than a single breath to blow it out.

215

New York City
March 13, 2014

XIV
Henry Strauss walks home alone through the dark.
Addie, he thinks, turning the name over in his mouth.
Addie, who looked at him and saw a boy with dark hair,
kind eyes, an open face.
Nothing more. And nothing else.
A cold gust blows, and he pulls his coat close, and looks
up at the starless sky.
And smiles.

216

217

PART THREE
THREE HUNDRED YEARS—AND
THREE WORDS

218

Title: Untitled Salon Sketch
Artist: Bernard Rodel
Date: c. 1751–3
Medium: Ink pen on parchment
Location: On loan from The Paris Salon exhibition at The British Library
Description: A rendering of Madame Geoﬀrin’s famous salon, brimming
with ﬁgures in various stages of conversation and repose. Several
recognizable personages—Rousseau, Voltaire, Diderot—can be discerned
among the group, but the most interesting inclusion is the three women
circling the room. One is clearly Madame Geoﬀrin. Another is believed to
be Suzanne Necker. But the third, an elegant woman with a freckled
face, remains a mystery.
Background: In addition to his contributions to Diderot’s Encyclopedia,
Rodel was an avid draftsman, and appears to have made use of his
rendering skill during many of his installments in Madame Geoﬀrin’s
salon. The freckled woman appears in several of his sketches, but is
never named.
Estimated Value: Unknown

219

Paris, France
July 29, 1724

I
Freedom is a pair of trousers and a buttoned coat.
A man’s tunic and a tricorne hat.
If only she had known.
The darkness claimed he’d given her freedom, but really,
there is no such thing for a woman, not in a world where
they are bound up inside their clothes, and sealed inside
their homes, a world where only men are given leave to
roam.
Addie saunters up the street, a stolen basket hooked over
the elbow of her coat. Nearby, an old woman stands in a
doorway, beating out a rug, and laborers lounge on café
steps, and none of them so much as blink, because they do
not see a woman, walking alone. They see a young man,
barely more than a youth, dawdling in the dying light; they
do not think how strange, how scandalous it is to see her
strolling. They do not think anything at all.
To think, Addie might have saved her soul, and simply
asked for these clothes.
It has been four years now without a visit from the dark.
Four years, and at the dawn of every one, she swears she
will not waste the time she has in waiting. But it is a promise
she cannot fully keep. For all her eﬀort, Addie is like a clock
wound tighter as the day draws near, a coiled spring that
cannot loosen until dawn. And even then, it is a grim

220

unwinding, less relief than resignation, the knowledge that it
will start again.
Four years.
Four winters, four summers, four visitless nights.
The other ones, at least, are hers, to spend as she likes,
but no matter how she tries to pass the time, this one
belongs to Luc, even when he is not here.
And yet, she will not declare it forfeit, will not sacriﬁce the
hours as if they are already lost, already his.
Addie passes a group of men and tips her hat in greeting,
uses the gesture to pull the tricorne lower on her own brow.
Day has not quite given way to night, and in the long
summer light she is careful to keep her distance, knowing
the illusion will falter under scrutiny. She could have waited
an hour longer and been safe within the veil of night, but
the truth is, she could not bear the stillness, the creeping
seconds of the clock.
Not tonight.
Tonight, she has decided to celebrate her freedom.
To climb the steps of Sacré Coeur, sit at the top of the
pale stone stairs, the city at her feet, and have a picnic.
The basket swings from her elbow, brimming with food.
Her ﬁngers have gotten light and quick with practice, and
she has spent the last several days assembling her feast—a
loaf of bread, a side of cured meat, a wedge of cheese, and
even a palm-sized jar of honey.
Honey—an indulgence Addie hasn’t had since Villon,
where Isabelle’s father kept a row of hives and skimmed the
amber syrup out for markets, leaving them to suck on rinds
of honeycomb until their ﬁngers were stained with
sweetness. Now she holds her bounty to the waning light,
lets the setting sun turn the contents gold.
The man comes out of nowhere.

221

A shoulder knocks into her arm, and the precious jar slips
from her hand and shatters on the cobbled street, and for
an instant Addie thinks she is being attacked, or robbed, but
the stranger is already stammering out his apologies.
“You fool,” she hisses, attention ﬂicking from the golden
syrup, now glittering with glass, to the man who caused her
loss. He is young, and fair, and lovely, with high cheeks and
hair the color of her ruined honey.
And he is not alone.
His companions hang back, whooping and cheering at his
mistake—they have the happy air of those who began their
evening revels back at midday—but the errant youth
blushes ﬁercely, clearly embarrassed.
“My apologies, truly,” he begins, but then a
transformation sweeps across his face. First surprise, and
then amusement, and she realizes, too late, how close they
are, how clearly the light has fallen on her face. Realizes,
too late, that he has seen through her illusion, that his hand
is still there, on her sleeve, and for a moment she is afraid
he will expose her.
But when his companions call for him to hurry on, he tells
them to go ahead, and now they are alone on the cobbled
street, and Addie is ready to pull free, to run, but there is no
shadow in the young man’s face, no menace, only a strange
delight.
“Let go,” she says, lowering her voice a measure when
she speaks, which only seems to please him more, even as
he frees her arm with all the speed of someone grazing ﬁre.
“Sorry,” he says again, “I forgot myself.” And then, a
mischievous grin. “It seems you have, too.”
“Not at all,” she says, ﬁngers drifting toward the short
blade she’s kept inside her basket. “I have misplaced myself
on purpose.”

222

The smile widens then, and he drops his gaze, and sees
the ruined honey on the ground, and shakes his head.
“I must make that up to you,” he says. And she is about
to tell him not to bother, about to say that it is ﬁne, when he
cranes his head down the road, and says, “Aha,” and loops
his arm through hers, as if they are already friends.
“Come,” he says, leading her toward the café on the
corner. She has never been inside one, never been brave
enough to chance it, not alone, not with such a tenuous hold
on her disguise. But he draws her on as if it’s nothing, and
at the last moment he swings an arm around her shoulders,
the weight so sudden and so intimate she is about to pull
away before she catches the edge of a smile, and realizes
that he has made a game of it, conscripted himself into the
service of her secret.
Inside, the café is a place of energy and life, overlapping
voices and the scent of something rich and smoky.
“Careful now,” he says, eyes dancing with mischief. “Stay
close, and keep your head down, or we will be found out.”
She follows him to the counter, where he orders two
shallow cups, the contents thin and black as ink. “Sit over
there,” he says, “against the wall, where the light is not too
strong.”
They fold themselves into a corner seat, and he sets the
cups between them with a ﬂourish, turning the handles just
so, as he tells her it is coﬀee. She has heard of the stuﬀ, of
course, the current toast of Paris, but when she lifts the
china to her lips and takes a sip, she is rather disappointed.
It is dark, and strong, and bitter, like the chocolate ﬂakes
she ﬁrst tasted years ago, only without the edge of
sweetness. But the boy stares at her, as eager as a pup, and
so she swallows, and smiles, cradles the cup, and looks out
from beneath the brim of her hat, studying the tables of
men, some with their heads bowed close, while others

223

laugh, and play at cards, or pass sheaves of paper back and
forth. She watches these men and wonders anew at how
open the world is to them, how easy the thresholds.
Her attention ﬂicks back to her companion, who’s
watching her with the same unbridled fascination.
“What were you thinking?” he asks. “Just now?”
There is no introduction, no formal exchange. He simply
dives into the conversation, as if they have known each
other for years instead of minutes.
“I was thinking,” she says, “that it must be so easy to be
a man.”
“Is that why you put on this disguise?”
“That,” she says, “and a hatred of corsets.”
He laughs, the sound so open and easy Addie ﬁnds a
smile rising to her lips.
“Do you have a name?” he asks, and she doesn’t know if
he’s asking for her own, or that of her disguise, but she
decides on “Thomas,” watches him turn the word over like a
bite of fruit.
“Thomas,” he muses. “A pleasure to meet you. My name
is Remy Laurent.”
“Remy,” she echoes, tasting the softness, the upturned
vowel. It suits him, more than Adeline ever suited her. It is
young and sweet, and it will haunt her, as all names do,
bobbing like apples in the stream. No matter how many men
she meets, Remy will always conjure him, this bright and
cheerful boy—the kind she could have loved, perhaps, if
given the chance.
She takes another sip, careful not to hold the cup too
gingerly, to lean the weight on her elbow, and sit in the
unselfconscious way men have when they do not expect
anyone to study them.
“Amazing,” he marvels. “You have studied my sex well.”
“Have I?”

224

“You are a splendid mimic.”
Addie could tell him that she’s had the time to practice,
that it has become a kind of game over the years, a way to
amuse herself. That she has added a dozen diﬀerent
characters by now, knows the exact diﬀerences between a
duchess and a marchioness, a docksman and a merchant.
But instead, she only says, “We all need ways to pass the
time.”
He laughs again at that, lifts his cup, but then, between
one sip and the next, Remy’s attention wanders across the
room, and he lands on something that startles him. He
chokes on his coﬀee, color rushing into his cheeks.
“What is it?” she asks. “Are you well?”
Remy coughs, nearly dropping the cup as he gestures to
the doorway, where a man has just walked in.
“Do you know him?” she asks, and Remy sputters, “Don’t
you? That man there is Monsieur Voltaire.”
She shakes her head a little. The name means nothing.
Remy draws a parcel from his coat. A booklet, thin, with
something printed on the cover. She frowns at the cursive
title, has only managed half the letters when Remy ﬂips the
booklet open to show a wall of words, printed in elegant
black ink. It has been too long since her father tried to teach
her, and those were simple letters; loose, handwritten
script.
Remy sees her studying the page. “Can you read it?”
“I know the letters,” she admits, “but I haven’t the
learning to make much sense of them. And by the time I
manage a line, I fear I’ve lost its meaning.”
Remy shakes his head. “It is a crime,” he says, “that
women are not taught the same as men. Why, a world
without reading, I cannot fathom it. A whole long life without
poems, or plays, or philosophers. Shakespeare, Socrates, to
say nothing of Descartes!”

225

“Is that all?” she teases.
“And Voltaire,” he goes on. “Of course, Voltaire. And
essays, and novels.”
She does not know the word.
“A single long story,” he explains, “something of pure
invention. Filled with romance, or comedy, or adventure.”
She thinks of the fairy tales her father told her, growing
up, the stories Estele spun of old gods. But this novel that
Remy speaks of sounds like it encompasses so much more.
She runs her ﬁngers over the page of the proﬀered booklet,
but her attention is on Remy, and his, for the moment, is on
Voltaire. “Are you going to introduce yourself?”
Remy’s gaze snaps back, horriﬁed. “No, no, not tonight. It
is better this way; think of the story.” He sits back in his
seat, glowing with joy. “See? This is what I love about Paris.”
“You are not from here, then.”
“Is anyone?” He has come back to her now. “No, I’m from
Rennes. A printer’s family. But I am the youngest son, and
my father made the grave mistake of sending me away to
school, and the more I read, the more I thought, and the
more I thought, the more I knew I had to be in Paris.”
“Your family didn’t mind?”
“Of course they did. But I had to come. This is where the
thinkers are. This is where the dreamers live. This is the
heart of the world, and the head, and it is changing.” His
eyes dance with light. “Life is so brief, and every night in
Rennes I’d go to bed, and lie awake, and think, there is
another day behind me, and who knows how few ahead.”
It is the same fear that forced her into the woods that
night, the same need that drove her to her fate.
“So here I am,” he says brightly. “I would not be
anywhere else. Isn’t it marvelous?”
Addie thinks of the stained glass and the locked doors,
the gardens, and the gates around them.

226

“It can be,” she says.
“Ah, you think me an idealist.”
Addie lifts the coﬀee to her lips. “I think it comes more
easily to men.”
“It does,” he admits, before nodding at her attire. “And
yet,” he says with an impish grin, “you strike me as
someone not easily restrained. Aut viam invenium aut
faciam, and so on.”
She does not know Latin yet, and he does not oﬀer a
translation, but a decade from now, she will look up the
words, and learn their meaning.
To ﬁnd a way, or make your own.
And she will smile, then, a ghost of the smile he has
managed to win from her tonight.
He blushes. “I must be boring you.”
“Not at all,” she says. “Tell me, does it pay, to be a
thinker?”
Laughter bubbles out of him. “No, not very well. But I am
still my father’s son.” He holds out his hands, palms up, and
she notices the echo of ink along the lines of his palms,
staining the whorls of his ﬁngers, the way charcoal used to
stain her own. “It is good work,” he says.
But under his words, a softer sound, the rumble of his
stomach.
Addie had almost forgotten the shattered jar, the ruined
honey. But the rest of the feast sits waiting at her feet.
“Have you ever climbed the steps of Sacré Coeur?”

227

New York City
March 15, 2014

II
After so many years, Addie thought she’d come to terms
with time.
She thought she’d made her peace with it—or that they’d
found a way to coexist—not friends by any means, but at
least no longer enemies.
And yet, the time between Thursday night and Saturday
afternoon is merciless, every second doled out with the care
of an old woman counting pennies to pay for bread. Not
once does it seem to quicken, not once does she lose track
of it. She can’t seem to spend it, or waste it, or even
misplace it. The minutes inﬂate around her, an ocean of
undrinkable time between now and then, between here and
the store, between her and Henry.
She’s spent the last two nights at a place in Prospect
Park, a cozy two-bedroom with a bay window belonging to
Gerard, a children’s book writer she met one winter. A kingsize bed, a pile of blankets, the soft hypnotic tick of the
radiator, and still she could not sleep. Could not do anything
but count and wait, and wish that she had said tomorrow,
had only to bear one day instead of two.
Three hundred years she’s managed to suﬀer time, but
now, now there is a present and a future, now there is
something waiting ahead, now she cannot wait to see the
look on Henry’s face, to hear her name on his lips.

228

Addie showers until the water goes cold, dries and styles
her hair three diﬀerent ways, sits on the kitchen island
tossing kernels of cereal up into the air, trying to catch them
on her tongue, as the clock on the wall inches forward from
10:13 A.M. to 10:14 A.M. Addie groans. She isn’t supposed to
meet Henry until 5:00 P.M. and time is slowing a little more
with every minute, and she thinks she might lose her mind.
It has been so long since she felt this kind of boredom,
the stir-crazy inability to focus, and it takes her all morning
to realize she isn’t bored at all.
She’s nervous.
Nervous, like tomorrow, a word for things that have not
happened yet. A word for futures, when for so long all she’s
had are presents.
Addie isn’t used to being nervous.
There’s no reason to be when you are always alone, when
any awkward moment can be erased by a closed door, an
instant apart, and every meeting is a fresh start. A clean
slate.
The clock reaches 11:00 A.M., and she decides she cannot
stay inside.
She sweeps up the few fallen pieces of leftover cereal,
sets the apartment back the way she found it, and heads
out into the late Brooklyn morning. Flits between boutiques,
desperate for distraction, assembling a new outﬁt because
for once the one she has won’t do. It is, after all, the same
one she wore before.
Before—another word that’s lost its shape.
Addie picks out pale jeans and a pair of black silk ﬂats, a
top with a plunging neckline, shrugs the leather jacket over
the top, even though it doesn’t match. It’s still the one piece
she cannot bear to leave.
Unlike the ring, it won’t come back.

229

Addie lets an enthusiastic girl in a makeup store sit her
down on a stool and spend an hour applying various
highlighters, liners, shades. When it’s over, the face in the
mirror is pretty, but wrong, the warm brown of her eyes
cooled by the smoky shadow around them, her skin too
smooth, the seven freckles hidden by a matte foundation.
Luc’s voice rises up like fog against the reﬂection.
I would rather see clouds blot out the stars.
Addie sends the girl oﬀ in search of coral lipstick, and the
moment she’s alone, Addie wipes the clouds away.
Somehow, she manages to shave oﬀ hours until it is 4:00
P.M., but she is outside the bookstore now, buzzing with hope
and fear. So she forces herself to circle the block, to count
the paving stones, to memorize each and every shop front
until it’s 4:45 P.M. and she cannot bear it anymore.
Four short steps. One open door.
And a single, leaden fear.
What if?
What if they spent too long apart?
What if the cracks have ﬁlled back in, the curse sealed
around her once again?
What if it was just a ﬂuke? A cruel joke?
What if what if what if—
Addie holds her breath, opens the door, and steps in.
But Henry isn’t there—instead there is someone else
behind the counter.
It is the girl. The one from the other day, who sat folded in
the leather chair, the one who called his name when Henry
ran out to catch Addie on the curb. Now she leans against
the till, paging through a large book full of glossy photos.
The girl is a work of art, strikingly pretty, dark skin draped
in silver threads, a sweater slouching oﬀ one shoulder. She
looks up at the sound of the bell.
“Can I help you?”

230

Addie falters, knocked oﬀ-balance by a vertigo of want
and fear. “I hope so,” she says. “I’m looking for Henry.”
The girl stares at her, studying her—
Then a familiar voice comes from the back.
“Bea, do you think this looks…” Henry rounds the corner,
smoothing his shirt, and trails oﬀ when he sees Addie. For
an instant, a fraction of a fraction of a moment, she thinks it
is over. That he has forgotten, and she is alone again, the
thin spell made days before snipped like a stray thread.
But then Henry smiles, and says, “You’re early.”
And Addie is dizzy with air, with hope, with light.
“Sorry,” she says, a little breathless.
“Don’t be. I see you’ve met Beatrice. Bea, this is Addie.”
She loves the way Henry says her name.
Luc used to wield it like a weapon, a knife grazing her
skin, but on Henry’s tongue, it’s a bell, something light, and
bright, and lovely. It rings out between them.
Addie. Addie. Addie.
“Déjà vu,” says Bea, shaking her head. “You ever meet
someone for the ﬁrst time, but you’re sure you’ve seen
them before?”
Addie almost laughs. “Yes.”
“I’ve already fed Book,” says Henry, talking to Bea as he
shrugs on his coat. “Do not sprinkle any more catnip in the
horror section.” She holds up her hands, bracelets jingling.
Henry turns to Addie with a sheepish grin. “You ready to
go?”
They’re halfway to the door when Bea snaps her ﬁngers.
“Baroque,” she says. “Or maybe Neoclassical.”
Addie stares back, confused. “The art periods?”
The other girl nods. “I have this theory that every face
belongs to one. A time. A school.”
“Bea is a post-grad,” interjects Henry. “Art history, in case
you couldn’t tell.”

231

“Henry here is obviously pure Romanticism. Our friend
Robbie is Postmodern—the avant-garde, of course, not the
minimalism. But you…” She taps a ﬁnger to her lips.
“There’s something timeless about you.”
“Stop ﬂirting with my date,” says Henry.
Date. The word thrills through her. A date is something
made, something planned; not a chance of opportunity, but
time set aside at one point for another, a moment in the
future.
“Have fun!” calls Bea cheerfully. “Don’t stay out too late.”
Henry rolls his eyes. “Bye, Bea,” he says, holding the
door.
“You owe me,” she adds.
“I’m granting you free access to the books.”
“Almost like a library!”
“Not a library!” he shouts back, and Addie smiles as she
follows him up onto the street. It is obviously an inside joke,
some shared, familiar thing, and she aches with longing,
wonders what it would feel like to know someone that well,
for the knowing to go both ways. Wonders if they could have
a joke like that, she and Henry. If they can know each other
long enough.
It is a cold evening, and they walk side by side, not
intertwined but elbows brushing, each leaning a little into
the other’s warmth. Addie marvels at it, this boy beside her,
his nose burrowed down into the scarf around his throat.
Marvels at the slight diﬀerence in his manner, the smallest
shift in ease. Days ago, she was a stranger to him, and now,
she is not, and he is learning her at the same rate she is
learning him, and it is still the beginning, it is still so new,
but they have moved one step along the road between
unknown and familiar. A step she has never been allowed to
take with anyone but Luc.
And yet.

232

Here she is, with this boy.
Who are you? she thinks as Henry’s glasses fog with
steam. He catches her looking, and winks.
“Where are we going?” she asks when they reach the
subway, and Henry looks at her and smiles, a shy, lopsided
grin.
“It’s a surprise,” he answers as they descend the steps.
They take the G train to Greenpoint, backtrack half a
block to a nondescript storefront, a WASH AND FOLD sign in the
window. Henry holds the door, and Addie steps through. She
looks around at the washing machines, the white-noise hum
of the rinse cycle, the shudder of the spin.
“It’s a laundromat,” she says.
But Henry’s eyes go bright with mischief. “It’s a
speakeasy.”
A memory lurches through her at the word, and she is in
Chicago, nearly a century ago, jazz circling like smoke in the
underground bar, the air heavy with the scent of gin and
cigars, the rattle of glasses, the open secret of it all. They sit
beneath a stained-glass window of an angel lifting his cup,
and Champagne breaks across her tongue, and the
darkness smiles against her skin, and draws her onto a ﬂoor
to dance, and it is the beginning and the end of everything.
Addie shudders, drawing herself back. Henry is holding
open the door at the back of the laundromat, and she
braces herself for a darkened room, a forced retreat into the
past, but she’s met instead by the neon lights and electronic
chime of an arcade game. Pinball, to be precise. The
machines line the walls, crammed side by side to make
room for the tables and stools, the wooden bar.
Addie stares around, bemused. It is not a speakeasy at all,
not in the strictest sense. It is simply one thing hidden
behind another. A palimpsest in reverse.

233

“Well?” he asks with a sheepish grin. “What do you
think?”
Addie feels herself smiling back, dizzy with relief. “I love
it.”
“All right,” he says, producing a bag of quarters from one
pocket. “Ready to lose?”
It’s early, but the place is far from empty.
Henry leads her to the corner, where he claims a pair of
vintage machines, and balances a tower of quarters on
each. She holds her breath as she inserts the ﬁrst coin,
braces for the inevitable clink of it rolling back into the dish
at the bottom. But it goes in, and the game springs to life,
emitting a cheerful cacophony of color and sound.
Addie exhales, a mixture of delight and relief.
Perhaps she is anonymous, the act as faceless as a theft.
Perhaps, but in the moment, she doesn’t care.
She pulls back the lever, and plays.

234

III
“How are you so good at pinball?” Henry demands as she
racks up points.
Addie isn’t sure. The truth is, she’s never played before,
and it’s taken her a few times to get the hang of the game,
but now she’s found her stride.
“I’m a fast learner,” she says, just before the ball slips
between her paddles.
“HIGH SCORE!” announces the game in a mechanical
drone.
“Well done,” calls Henry over the noise. “Better own your
victory.”
The screen ﬂashes, waiting for her to enter her name.
Addie hesitates.
“Like this,” he says, showing her how to toggle the red
box between the letters. He steps aside, but when she tries,
the cursor doesn’t move. The light just ﬂashes over the
letter A, mocking.
“It doesn’t matter,” she says, backing away, but Henry
steps in.
“New machines, vintage problems.” He bumps it with his
hip, and the square goes solid around the A. “There we go.”
He’s about to step aside, but Addie catches his arm.
“Enter my name while I grab the next round.”

235

It’s easier now that the place is full. She swipes a couple
of beers from the edge of the counter, weaves back through
the crowd before the bartender even turns around. And
when she returns, drinks in hand, the ﬁrst things she sees
are the letters, ﬂashing in bright red on the screen.
ADI.
“I didn’t know how to spell your name,” he says.
And it’s wrong, but it doesn’t even matter; nothing
matters but those three letters, glowing back at her, almost
like a stamp, a signature.
“Swap,” says Henry, hands resting on her hips as he
guides her over to his machine. “Let’s see if I can beat that
score.”
She holds her breath and hopes that no one ever will.

They play until they run out of quarters and beer, until the
place is too crowded for comfort, until they truly can’t hear
each other over the ring and clash of the games and the
shouts of the other people, and then they spill out of the
dark arcade. They go back through the too-bright
laundromat, and then out onto the street, still bubbling with
energy.
It’s dark out now, the sky overhead a low canopy of dense
gray clouds, promising rain, and Henry shoves his hands in
his pockets, looks up and down the street. “What now?”
“You want me to choose?”
“This is an equal opportunity date,” he says, rocking from
heel to toe. “I provided the ﬁrst chapter. It’s your turn.”
Addie hums to herself, looking around, summoning a
mental picture of the neighborhood.
“Good thing I found my wallet,” she says, patting her
pocket. She didn’t, of course, but she did liberate a few
twenties from the illustrator’s kitchen drawer before she left
236

that morning. Judging by the recent proﬁle of him in The
Times, and the reported size of his latest book deal, Gerald
won’t miss it.
“This way.” Addie takes oﬀ down the sidewalk.
“How far are we going?” he asks ﬁfteen minutes later,
when they’re still walking.
“I thought you were a New Yorker,” she teases.
But his strides are long enough to match her speed, and
ﬁve minutes later they round the corner, and there it is. The
Nitehawk lights up the darkening street, white bulbs tracing
patterns on the brick façade, the word CINEMA picked out in
red neon light across its front.
Addie has been to every movie theater in Brooklyn, the
massive multiplexes with their stadium seats and the indie
gems with worn-out sofas, has witnessed every mixture of
new releases and nostalgia.
And the Nitehawk is one of her favorites.
She scans the board, buys two tickets to a showing of
North by Northwest, since Henry says he’s never seen it,
then takes his hand and leads them down the hall into the
dark.
There are little tables between each seat with plastic
menus and slips of paper to write your order on. She’s never
been able to order anything, of course—the pencil marks
dissolve, the waiter forgets about her as soon as he is out of
sight—so she leans in to watch Henry ﬁll out their card,
thrilled by the simple potential of the act.
The previews ramble on as the seats ﬁll up around them,
and Henry takes her hand, their ﬁngers lacing together like
links in a chain. She glances over at him, painted in the low
theater light. Black curls. High cheekbones. The cupid’s bow
of his mouth. The ﬂicker of resemblance.
It is hardly the ﬁrst time she’s seen Luc echoed in a
human face.

237

“You’re staring,” whispers Henry under the sound of the
previews.
Addie blinks. “Sorry.” She shakes her head. “You look like
someone I used to know.”
“Someone you liked, I hope.”
“Not really.” He shoots her a look of mock aﬀront, and
Addie almost laughs. “It was more complicated than that.”
“Love, then?”
She shakes her head. “No…” But her delivery is slower,
less emphatic. “But he was very nice to look at.”
Henry laughs as the lights dim, and the movie starts.
A diﬀerent waiter appears, crouching low as he delivers
their food, and she plucks fries from the plate one by one,
sinking into the comfort of the ﬁlm. She glances over to see
if Henry’s enjoying himself, but he’s not even looking at the
screen. His face, all energy and light an hour before, is a
rictus of tension. One knee bounces restlessly.
She leans in, whispers. “You don’t like it?”
Henry ﬂashes a hollow smile. “It’s ﬁne,” he says, shifting
in his seat. “Just a little slow.”
It’s Hitchcock, she wants to say, but instead she whispers,
“It’s worth it, I promise.”
Henry twists toward her, brow folding. “You’ve already
seen it?”
Of course Addie has seen it.
First, in 1959, at a theater in Los Angeles, and then in the
’70s, a double feature with his last ﬁlm, Family Plot, and
then again, a few years back, right in Greenwich Village,
during a retrospective. Hitchcock has a way of being
resurrected, fed back into the cinema system at regular
intervals.
“Yeah,” she whispers back. “But I don’t mind.”
Henry says nothing, but he clearly does mind. His knee
goes back to bouncing, and a few minutes later he’s up and

238

out of the seat, walking out into the lobby.
“Henry,” she calls, confused. “What is it? What’s wrong?”
She catches up with him as he throws open the theater
door and steps out onto the curb. “Sorry,” he mumbles.
“Needed some air.”
But that’s obviously not it. He’s pacing.
“Talk to me.”
His steps slow. “I just wish you’d told me.”
“Told you what?”
“That you’d already seen it.”
“But you hadn’t,” she says. “And I didn’t mind seeing it
again. I like seeing things again.”
“I don’t,” he snaps, and then deﬂates. “I’m sorry.” He
shakes his head. “I’m sorry. This isn’t your problem.” He
runs his hands through his hair. “I just—” He shakes his
head, and turns to look at her, green eyes glassy in the
dark. “Do you ever feel like you’re running out of time?”
Addie blinks and it is three hundred years ago and she is
back on her knees on the forest ﬂoor, hands driving down
into the mossy earth as the church bells ring behind her.
“I don’t mean in that normal, time ﬂies way,” Henry’s
saying. “I mean feeling like its surging by so fast, and you
try to reach out and grab it, you try to hold on, but it just
keeps rushing away. And every second, there’s a little less
time, and a little less air, and sometimes when I’m sitting
still, I start to think about it, and when I think about it, I
can’t breathe. I have to get up. I have to move.”
He has his arms wrapped around himself, ﬁngers digging
into his ribs.
It’s been a long time since Addie felt that kind of urgency,
but she remembers it well, remembers the fear, so heavy
she thought it might crush her.
Blink and half your life is gone.
I do not want to die as I’ve lived.

239

Born and buried in the same ten-meter plot.
Addie reaches out and grabs his arm. “Come on,” she
says, pulling him down the street. “Let’s go.”
“Where?” he asks, and her hand drops to his, and holds
on tight.
“To ﬁnd you something new.”

240

Paris, France
July 29, 1724

IV
Remy Laurent is laughter bottled into skin. It spills out of
him at every turn.
As they walk together through Montmartre, he tips the
brow of Addie’s hat, plucks at her collar, slings his arm
around her shoulders, and inclines his head, as if to whisper
some salacious secret. Remy delights in being part of her
charade, and she delights in having someone to share it
with.
“Thomas, you fool,” he jeers loudly when they pass a
huddle of men.
“Thomas, you scoundrel,” he calls out as they pass a pair
of women—girls really, though wrapped in rouge and
tattered lace—at the mouth of an alley. They, too, take up
the call.
“Thomas,” they echo, teasing and sweet, “come be our
scoundrel, Thomas. Thomas, come have some fun.”
They climb the vaulting steps of the Sacré Coeur, are
nearly to the top when Remy stops and spreads his coat on
the steps, gesturing for her to sit.
They divide the food between them, and as they eat, she
studies her strange companion.
Remy is Luc’s opposite, in every way. His hair is a crown
of burnished gold, his eyes a summer blue, but more than
that, it’s in his manner: his easy smile, his open laugh, the

241

vibrant energy of youth. If one is the thrilling darkness, the
other is midday radiance, and if the boy is not quite as
handsome, well, that is only because he is human.
He is real.
Remy sees her staring, and laughs. “Are you making a
study of me, for your art? I must say, you have mastered
the posture and the manners of a Paris youth.”
She looks down, realizes she is sitting with one knee
drawn up, her arm hooked lazily around her leg.
“But,” adds Remy, “I fear you are far too pretty, even in
the dark.”
He has moved closer, his hand ﬁnding hers.
“What is your real name?” he asks, and how she wishes
she could tell him. She tries, she tries—thinking maybe just
this once, the sounds will make it over her tongue. But her
voice catches after the A, so instead she changes course,
and says, “Anna.”
“Anna,” Remy echoes, tucking a stray lock behind her ear.
“It suits you.”
She will use a hundred names over the years, and
countless times, she will hear those words, until she begins
to wonder at the importance of a name at all. The very idea
will begin to lose its meaning, the way a word does when
said too many times, breaking down into useless sounds
and syllables. She will use the tired phrase as proof that a
name does not really matter—even as she longs to say and
hear her own.
“Tell me, Anna,” says Remy, now. “Who are you?”
And so she tells him. Or at least, she tries—spills out the
whole strange and winding journey, and then, when it does
not even reach his ears, she starts again, and tells him
another version of the truth, one that skirts the edges of her
story, smoothing the rough corners into something more
human.

242

Anna’s story is a pale shadow of Adeline’s.
A girl running away from a woman’s life. She leaves
behind everything she has ever known, and escapes to the
city, disowned, alone, but free.
“Unbelievable,” he says. “You simply left?”
“I had to,” she says, and it is not a lie. “Admit it, you think
me mad.”
“Indeed,” says Remy with a playful grin. “The maddest.
And the most incredible. What courage!”
“It did not feel like courage,” Addie says, plucking at the
rind of bread. “It felt as if I had no choice. As if…” The words
lodge in her throat, but she isn’t sure if it’s the curse, or
simply the memory. “It felt as if I’d die there.”
Remy nods thoughtfully. “Small places make for small
lives. And some people are ﬁne with that. They like knowing
where to put their feet. But if you only walk in other
people’s steps, you cannot make your own way. You cannot
leave a mark.”
Addie’s throat tightens.
“Do you think a life has any value if one doesn’t leave
some mark upon the world?”
Remy’s expression sobers, and he must read the sadness
in her voice, because he says, “I think there are many ways
to matter.” He plucks the book from his pocket. “These are
the words of a man—Voltaire. But they are also the hands
that set the type. The ink that made it readable, the tree
that made the paper. All of them matter, though credit goes
only to the name on the cover.”
He has misread her, of course, assumed the question
stemmed from a diﬀerent, more common fear. Still, his
words hold weight—though it will be years before Addie
discovers just how much.
They fall to silence, then, the quiet weighted with their
thoughts. The summer heat has broken, given way to a

243

breezy comfort with the thickest part of night. The hour
settles on them like a sheet.
“It is late,” he says. “Let me walk you home.”
She shakes her head. “You do not have to.”
“But I do,” he protests. “You may disguise yourself as a
man, but I know the truth, and so honor will not let me leave
you. The darkness is no place to be alone.”
He does not know how right he is. Her chest aches at the
idea of losing the thread of this night, and the ease
beginning to take shape between them, an ease born of
hours instead of days or months, but it is something, fragile
and lovely.
“Very well,” she says, and his smile, when it answers, is
pure joy.
“Lead the way.”
She has nowhere to take him, but she sets oﬀ, in the
vague direction of a place she stayed several months
before. Her chest tightens a little with every step, because
every step brings her closer to the end of this, of them. And
when they turn onto the street where she has placed her
made-up home, and stopped before her imagined door,
Remy leans in and kisses her once, on the cheek. Even in
the dark she can see him blushing.
“I would see you again,” he says, “in daylight, or in
darkness. As a woman, or a man. Please, let me see you
again.”
And her heart breaks, because of course, there is no
tomorrow, only tonight, and Addie is not ready for the
thread to snap, the night to end, and so she answers, “Let
me walk you home,” and when he opens his mouth to
protest, she presses on, “The darkness is no place to be
alone.”
He meets her gaze, and perhaps he knows her meaning,
or perhaps he is as loath as she to leave this night behind,

244

because he quickly oﬀers his arm and says, “How
chivalrous,” and they set oﬀ together again, laughing as
they realize they are retracing their steps, returning the way
they came. And if the walk to her imagined home was
leisurely, the walk to his is urgent, threaded with
anticipation.
When they reach his lodging house, they do not pretend
to say good-bye. He leads her up the stairs, ﬁngers tangled
now, steps tripping and breathless, and when they reach his
rented room, they do not linger on the threshold.
There is a faint catch in her chest at the idea of what
comes next.
Sex has only ever been a burden, a necessity of
circumstance, some required currency, and she has, up until
now, been willing to pay the price. Even now, she is
prepared for him to push her down, to shove her skirts out
of the way. Prepared for the longing to break, forced away
by the unsubtle act.
But he doesn’t thrust himself upon her. There is an
urgency, yes, but Remy holds it taut as rope between them.
He reaches out a single, steady hand, and lifts the hat from
her head, sets it gently on the bureau. His ﬁngers slide up
the nape of her neck, and through her hair as his mouth
ﬁnds hers, the kisses shy, and searching.
For the ﬁrst time, she feels no reluctance, no dread, only
a kind of nervous thrill, and the tension in the air is laced
with breathless hunger.
Her ﬁngers fumble for the laces of his trousers, but his
own hands move slower, undoing the laces of her tunic,
sliding the cloth over her head, unwrapping the muslin
bound around her breasts.
“So much easier than corsets,” he murmurs, kissing the
skin of her collar, and for the ﬁrst time since those nights in

245

her childhood bed back in Villon, Addie feels the heat rising
in her cheeks, across her skin, between her legs.
He guides her back onto the pallet, kisses trailing down
her throat, the curve of her breasts, before he frees himself,
and climbs onto the bed, and onto her. She parts around
him, breath hitching at the ﬁrst thrust, and Remy pulls back,
just enough to catch her eye, to make sure she’s okay, and
when she nods, he drops his head to kiss her, and only then
does he press on, press in, press deep.
Her back arches as that pressure gives way to pleasure, a
deep and rolling heat. Their bodies press and move
together, and she wishes she could erase those other men,
those other nights, their stale breath and awkward bulk, the
dull thrusts that ended in a sudden, abrupt spasm, before
they pulled out, pulled away. To them, wet was wet, and
warm was warm, and she was nothing but a vessel for their
pleasure.
She cannot erase the memory of those other nights—so
she decides to become a palimpsest, to let Remy write over
the other lines.
This is how it should have been.
The name Remy whispers in her hair is not hers, but it
doesn’t matter. In this moment, she can be Anna. She can
be anyone.
Remy’s breath quickens as his tempo rises, as he presses
deeper, and Addie feels herself quicken, too, her body
tightening around him, driven toward the edge by the
rocking of his hips and the blond curls tumbling into her
face. She coils tighter and tighter, and then she comes
undone, and a few moments later, so does he.
Remy collapses down beside her. But he doesn’t roll away.
He reaches out, and sweeps a lock of hair from her cheek,
and kisses her temple, and laughs, little more than a smile
given sound, but it warms her all the way through.

246

He falls back against the pillow, and sleep comes over
them, his leaden in the aftermath of pleasure, and hers
light, dozing, but dreamless.
Addie no longer dreams.
She hasn’t, in truth, since that night in the woods. Or if
she has, it is the one thing she never remembers. Perhaps
there is no space inside her head, full as it is of memories.
Perhaps it is yet another facet of her curse, to live only as
she does. Or perhaps it is in some strange sense a mercy,
for how many would be nightmares.
But she stays, happy and warm beside him, and for a few
hours she almost forgets.
Remy has rolled away from her in sleep, exposing the
lean breadth of his back, and she rests her hand between
his shoulder blades, and feels him breathing, traces her
ﬁngers down the slope of his spine, studying his edges the
way he’d studied hers in the midst of passion. Her touch is
feather-light, but after a moment, he stirs, and shifts, and
rolls to face her.
For a brief moment, his face is wide and open and warm;
the face that leaned toward hers in the street and smiled
through shared secrets in the café and laughed as he
walked her ﬁrst to her home and then to his.
But in the time it takes for him to fully wake, that face
slides away, and all the knowing with it. A shadow sweeps
across those warm blue eyes, that welcome mouth. He jerks
a little, rises on one elbow, ﬂustered by the sight of this
stranger in his bed.
Because, of course, she is a stranger now.
For the ﬁrst time since they met the night before, he
frowns, stammers a greeting, the words too formal, stiﬀ with
embarrassment, and Addie’s heart breaks a little. He is
trying to be kind, but she cannot bear it, so she gets up and
dresses as fast as she can, a gross reversal of the time he

247

took to strip the clothes away. She does not bother with the
laces or the buckles. Does not turn toward him again, not
until she feels the warmth of his hand on her shoulder, the
touch almost gentle, and thinks, desperately, wildly, that
maybe—maybe—there is a way to salvage this. She turns,
hoping to meet his eyes, only to ﬁnd him looking down,
away, as he presses three coins into her hand.
And everything goes cold.
Payment.
It will be many years before she can read Greek, many
more before she hears the myth of Sisyphus, but when she
does, she will nod in understanding, palms aching from the
weight of pushing stones uphill, heart heavy from the
weight of watching them roll down again.
In this moment, there is no myth for company.
Only this beautiful boy with his back to her.
Only Remy, who makes no move to follow when she
hurries to the door.
Something catches her eye, a bundle of paper askew on
the ﬂoor. The booklet from the café. The latest of Voltaire.
Addie doesn’t know what drives her to take it—perhaps she
simply wants a token of their night, something more than
the dreaded copper in her palm—but one moment the book
is on the ground, cast-oﬀ among the clothes, and the next it
is pressed to her front with the rest of her things.
Her hands have gotten light, after all, and even if the
theft was clumsy, Remy would not have noticed, sitting
there on the bed, his attention ﬁxed anywhere but her.

248

New York City
March 15, 2014

V
Addie leads Henry down the street and around the corner to
a nondescript steel door plastered with old posters. A man
loiters next to it, chain-smoking and scrolling through
pictures on his phone.
“Jupiter,” she says, unprompted, and the man straightens,
and pushes open the door, exposing a narrow platform, and
a set of stairs that drops down out of sight.
“Welcome to the Fourth Rail.”
Henry shoots her a wary look, but Addie grabs his hand
and pulls him through. He twists, looking back as the door
swings shut. “There is no fourth rail,” he says, and Addie
ﬂashes him a grin.
“Exactly.”
This is what she loves about a city like New York. It is so
full of hidden chambers, inﬁnite doors leading into inﬁnite
rooms, and if you have the time, you can ﬁnd so many of
them. Some she’s found by accident, others in the course of
this or that adventure. She keeps them tucked away, like
slips of paper between the pages of her book.
One stairwell leads to another, the second wider, made of
stone. The ceiling arches overhead, plaster giving way to
rock, and then tile, the tunnel lit only by a series of electric
lanterns, but they’re spaced far enough apart that they do
little to actually break the dark. A breadcrumb trail, just

249

enough to see by, which is why Addie has the pleasure of
seeing Henry’s expression when he realizes where they are.
The New York City Subway has nearly ﬁve hundred active
stations, but the number of abandoned tunnels remains a
matter of contention. Some of them are open to the public,
both monuments to the past and nods to the unﬁnished
future. Some are little more than closed tracks tucked
between functioning lines.
And then some are secrets.
“Addie…” murmurs Henry, but she holds up a ﬁnger, tilts
her head. Listening.
The music starts as an echo, a distant thrum, as much a
feeling as a sound. It rises with every downward step,
seems to ﬁll the air around them, ﬁrst a hum, and then a
pulse, and then, at last, a beat.
Ahead the tunnel is bricked up, marked only by the white
slash of an arrow to the left. Around the corner, the music
grows. One more dead end, one more turn and—
Sound crashes over them.
The whole tunnel vibrates with the force of the bass, the
reverb of chords against stone. Spotlights pulse blue-white,
a strobe reducing the hidden club to still frames; a writhing
crowd, bodies bouncing to the beat; a pair of musicians
wielding matching electric guitars on a concrete stage; a
row of bartenders caught mid-pour.
The tunnel walls are tiled gray and white, wide bands that
wrap in arches overhead, bend down again like ribs, as if
they are in the belly of some great, forgotten beast, the
rhythm pulsing through its heart.
The Fourth Rail is primal, heady. The kind of place Luc
would love.
But this? This is hers. Addie found the tunnel on her own.
She showed it to the musician-turned-manager looking for a
venue. Later that night, she even suggested the name, their

250

heads bent over a cocktail napkin. His pen marks. Her idea.
She’s sure he woke up the next day with a hangover and the
ﬁrst stirrings of the Fourth Rail. Six months later, she saw
the guy standing outside the steel doors. Saw the logo
they’d designed, a more polished version, tucked beneath
the peeling posters, and felt the now-familiar thrill of
whispering something into the world and watching it
become real.
Addie pulls Henry toward the makeshift bar.
It’s simple, the tunnel wall divided into three behind a
wide slab of pale stone that serves as a pouring surface. The
options are vodka, bourbon, or tequila, and a bartender
stands, waiting, before each.
Addie orders for them. Two vodkas.
The transaction happens in silence—there is no point
trying to shout over the wall of sound. A series of ﬁngers
held up, a ten laid on the bar. The bartender—a slender
black guy with silver dusting his eyes—pours two shots, and
spreads his hands like a dealer laying down cards.
Henry lifts his glass and Addie raises hers too and their
mouths move together (she thinks he’s saying cheers while
she answers salut), but the sounds are swallowed up, the
clink of their shots nothing but a small vibration through her
ﬁngers.
The vodka hits her stomach like a match, heat blossoming
behind her ribs.
They set the empty glasses back on the bar, and Addie’s
already pulling Henry toward the crush of bodies by the
stage when the guy behind the bar reaches out and catches
Henry’s wrist.
The bartender smiles, produces a third shot glass, and
pours again. He presses his hands to his chest in the
universal gesture for it’s on me.

251

They drink, and there is the heat again, spreading from
her chest to her limbs, and there is Henry’s hand in hers,
moving into the crowd. Addie looks back, sees the bartender
staring after them, and there is a strange feeling, rising like
the last dregs of a dream, and she wants to say something,
but the music is a wall, and the vodka smooths the edges of
her thoughts until it slips away, and then they are folding
into the crowd.
Up above it may be early spring, but down here it is late
summer, humid and heavy. The music is liquid, the air thick
as syrup as they plunge into the tangled limbs. The tunnel is
bricked up behind the stage, making a world of reverb, a
place where sound bends back, redoubles, every note
carried, thinning, without trailing oﬀ entirely. The guitarists
play a complicated riﬀ in perfect unison, adding to the echo
chamber eﬀect, churning the waters of the crowd.
And then the girl steps into the spotlight.
A teenage sprite—a fae thing, Luc would say—in a black
baby doll dress and combat boots. Her white-blond hair is
piled on her head, done up in twin buns, the ends spiking
like a crown. The only color is the slash of her red lips, and
the rainbow drawn like a mask across her eyes. The
guitarists quicken, ﬁngers ﬂying over strings. The air shakes,
the beat thumps through skin and muscle and bone.
And the girl begins to sing.
Her voice is a wail, a banshee’s call if a banshee
screamed in tune. The syllables bleed together, the
consonants blur, and Addie ﬁnds herself leaning in, eager to
hear the words. But they draw back, slip under the beat,
fold into the feral energy of the Fourth Rail.
The guitars play their hypnotic chorus.
The girl singer seems almost like a puppet, pulled along
by the strings.

252

And Addie thinks that Luc would love her, wonders for an
instant if he’s been down here since she’d found it. She
breathes in as if she’d be able to smell the darkness, like
smoke, on the air. But Addie wills herself to stop, empties
her head of him, makes space instead for the boy beside
her, bouncing in time with the beat.
Henry, with his head tipped back, his glasses fogged gray,
and sweat sliding down his cheeks like tears. For an instant
he looks impossibly, immeasurably sad, and she remembers
the pain in his voice when he spoke of losing time.
But then he looks at her and smiles, and it’s gone, a trick
of the lights, and she wonders who and how and where he
came from, knows it is all too good to be true, but in this
moment, she is simply glad he’s there.
She closes her eyes, lets herself fall into the rhythm of the
beat, and she is in Berlin, Mexico City, Madrid, and she is
right here, right now, with him.
They dance until their limbs ache.
Until sweat paints their skin, and the air becomes too
thick to breathe.
Until there’s a lull in the beat, and another silent
conversation passed between them like a spark.
Until he draws her back toward the bar and the tunnel,
back the way they came, but the ﬂow of traﬃc is a one-way
street, the stairs and the steel door only lead in.
Until she cocks her head the other way, to a dark arch set
in the tunnel wall near the stage, leads him up the narrow
stairs, the music fading a little more with every upward
step, ears buzzing with the white noise left in its wake.
Until they spill out into the cool March night, ﬁlling their
lungs with fresh air.
And the ﬁrst clear sound Addie hears is his laughter.
Henry turns toward her, eyes bright, cheeks ﬂushed,
intoxicated in a way that has less to do with the vodka than

253

with the power of the Fourth Rail.
He is still laughing when the storm starts.
A crack of thunder, and seconds later, the rain comes
down. Not a drizzle—not even the sparse warning drops that
soon give way to a steady rain—but the sudden sheet fall of
a downpour. The kind of rain that hits you like a wall, soaks
you through in seconds.
Addie gasps at the sudden shock of cold.
They are ten feet from the nearest awning, but neither of
them runs for cover.
She smiles up into the rain, lets the water kiss her skin.
Henry looks at her, and Addie looks back, and then he
spreads his arms as if to welcome the storm, his chest
heaving. Water clings to his black lashes, slides down his
face, rinsing the club from his clothes, and Addie realizes
suddenly that, despite the moments of resemblance, Luc
never once looked like this.
Young.
Human.
Alive.
She pulls Henry toward her, relishes the press of his body,
warm against the cold. She runs her hand through his hair
and for the ﬁrst time it stays back, exposing the sharp lines
of his face, the hungry hollows of his jaw, his eyes, a
brighter shade of green than she has seen them yet.
“Addie,” he breathes, and the sound sends sparks across
her skin, and when he kisses her, he tastes like salt, and
summer. But it feels too much like a punctuation mark, and
she isn’t ready for the night to end, so she kisses him back,
deeper, turns the period into a question, into an answer.
And then they are running, not for shelter, but the train.

254

They stumble into his apartment, wet clothes clinging to
their skin.
They are a tangle of limbs in the hallway, unable to get
close enough. She pulls the glasses from his face, tosses
them onto a nearby chair, shrugs out of her coat, the
leather sticking to her skin. And then they are kissing again.
Desperate, hungry, wild, as her ﬁngers run over his ribs,
hook in the front of his jeans.
“Are you sure?” he asks, and in answer she pulls his
mouth to hers, guides his hands to the buttons of her shirt
as hers ﬁnd his belt. He presses her back against the wall,
and says her name, and it is lightning through her limbs, it
is ﬁre through her core, it is longing between her legs.
And then they are on the bed, and for an instant, only an
instant, she is somewhere else, somewhen else, the
darkness folding itself around her. A name whispered
against bare skin.
But to him she was Adeline, only Adeline. His Adeline. My
Adeline.
Here, now, she is ﬁnally Addie.
“Say it again,” she pleads.
“Say what?” he murmurs.
“My name.”
Henry smiles.
“Addie,” he whispers against her throat.
“Addie.” The kisses trail over her collar.
“Addie.” Her stomach.
“Addie.” Her hips.
His mouth ﬁnds the heat between her legs, and her
ﬁngers tangle in those black curls, her back arching up with
pleasure. Time shudders, slides out of focus. He retraces his
steps, kisses her again, and then she is on top of him,
pressing him down into the bed.

255

They do not ﬁt together perfectly. He was not made for
her the way Luc was—but this is better, because he is real,
and kind, and human, and he remembers.
When it is over, she collapses, breathless, into the sheets
beside him, sweat and rain chilling on her skin. Henry folds
around her, pulls her back into the circle of his warmth, and
she can feel his heart slowing through his ribs, a metronome
easing back into its measure.
The room goes quiet, marked only by the steady rain
beyond the windows, the drowsy aftermath of passion, and
soon she can feel him drifting down toward sleep.
Addie looks up at the ceiling.
“Don’t forget,” she says softly, the words half prayer, half
plea.
Henry’s arms tighten, a body surfacing from sleep.
“Forget what?” he murmurs, already sinking again.
And Addie waits for his breath to steady before she
whispers the word to the dark.
“Me.”

256

Paris, France
July 29, 1724

VI
Addie surges out into the night, swiping tears from her
cheeks.
She pulls her jacket close despite the warmth of summer,
and makes her way alone across the sleeping city. She is not
heading toward the hovel she’s called home this season.
She is simply moving forward, because she cannot bear the
idea of standing still.
So Addie walks.
And at some point, she realizes she is no longer alone.
There is a change in the air, a subtle breeze, carrying the
leafy scent of country woods, and then he is there, falling in
step beside her, stride for stride. An elegant shadow,
dressed in the height of Paris fashion, collar and cuﬀ
trimmed in silk.
Only his black curls billow around his face, feral and free.
“Adeline, Adeline,” he says, his voice laced with pleasure,
and she is back in the bed, Remy’s voice saying Anna, Anna
into her hair.
It has been four years without a visit.
Four years of holding her breath, and though she will
never admit it, the sight of him is like coming up for air. A
terrible, chest-opening relief. As much as she hates this
shadow, this god, this monster in his stolen ﬂesh, he is still
the only one who remembers her at all.

257

It does not make her hate him any less.
If anything, she hates him more.
“Where have you been?” she snaps.
Smug pleasure shines like starlight in his eyes. “Why?
Have you missed me?” Addie doesn’t trust herself to speak.
“Come now,” Luc presses, “you did not think I would make it
easy.”
“It’s been four years,” she says, wincing at the anger in
her voice, too close to need.
“Four years is nothing. A breath. A blink.”
“And yet, you come tonight.”
“I know your heart, my dear. I feel when it falters.”
Remy’s ﬁngers folding hers over the coins, the sudden
weight of sadness, and the darkness, drawn to pain like a
wolf to blood.
Luc looks down at her trousers, pinned below the knee,
the man’s tunic, open at the throat. “I must say,” he says, “I
preferred you in red.”
Her heart catches at the mention of that night four years
before, the ﬁrst time he did not come. He savors the sight of
her surprise.
“You saw,” she says.
“I am the night itself. I see everything.” He steps closer,
carrying the scent of summer storms, the kiss of forest
leaves. “But that was a lovely dress you wore on my behalf.”
Shame slides like a ﬂush beneath her skin, followed by
the heat of anger, at the knowledge that he was watching.
Had watched her hope gutter with the candles on the sill,
watched as she shattered, alone in the dark.
She loathes him, wears that loathing like a coat, wraps it
tight around her as she smiles.
“You thought I would wither without your attention. But I
have not.”

258

The darkness hums. “It has only been four years,” he
muses. “Perhaps next time I will wait longer. Or perhaps…”
His hand grazes her chin, tipping her face to meet his. “I will
abandon these visits, and leave you to wander the earth
until it ends.”
It is a chilling thought, though she does not let him see it.
“If you did that,” she says evenly, “you would never have
my soul.”
He shrugs. “I have a thousand others waiting to be
reaped, and you are only one.” He is closer now, too close,
his thumb tracing up her jaw, ﬁngers sliding along the back
of her neck. “It would be so easy to forget you. Everyone
else already has.” She tries to pull away, but his hand is
stone, holding her fast. “I will be kind. It will be quick. Say
yes now,” he urges, “before I change my mind.”
For a terrible moment, she doesn’t trust herself to answer.
The weight of the coins in her palm is still too fresh, the pain
of the night torn away, and victory dances like light in Luc’s
eyes. It is enough to force her to her senses.
“No,” she says, the word a snarl.
And there it is, like a gift, a ﬂash of anger on that perfect
face.
His hand falls away, the weight of him vanishing like
smoke, and Addie is left alone once more in the dark.

There is a point when the night breaks.
When the darkness ﬁnally begins to weaken, and lose its
hold over the sky. It’s slow, so slow she doesn’t notice until
the light is already creeping in, until the moon and stars
have vanished, and the weight of Luc’s attention lifts from
her shoulders.
Addie climbs the steps of the Sacré Coeur, sits at the top,
with the church at her back and Paris sprawling at her feet,
259

and watches the 29th of July become the 30th, watches the
sun rise over the city.
She has almost forgotten the book she took from Remy’s
ﬂoor.
She has clutched it so tight, her ﬁngers ache. Now, in the
watery morning light, she puzzles over the title, silently
sounding out the words. La Place Royale. It is a novel, that
new word, though she doesn’t yet know it. Addie peels back
the cover, and tries to read the ﬁrst page, manages only a
line before the words crumble into letters, and the letters
blur, and she has to resist the urge to cast the cursed book
away, to ﬂing it down the steps.
Instead, she closes her eyes, and takes a deep breath,
and thinks of Remy, not his words, but the soft pleasure in
his voice when he spoke of reading, the delight in his eyes,
the joy, the hope.
It will be a grueling journey, full of starts and stops and
myriad frustrations.
To decipher this ﬁrst novel will take her almost a year—a
year spent laboring over every line, trying to make sense of
a sentence, then a page, then a chapter. And still, it will be a
decade more before the act comes naturally, before the task
itself dissolves, and she ﬁnds the hidden pleasure of the
story.
It will take time, but time is the one thing Addie has
plenty of.
So she opens her eyes, and starts again.

260

New York City
March 16, 2014

VII
Addie wakes to the smell of toast browning, the sizzle of
butter hitting a hot skillet. The bed is empty beside her, the
door almost closed, but she can hear Henry moving in the
kitchen beneath the soft burble of talk radio. The room is
cool, and the bed is warm, and she holds her breath and
tries to hold the moment with it, the way she has a
thousand times, clutching the past to the present, and
warding oﬀ the future, the fall.
But today is diﬀerent.
Because someone remembers.
She throws oﬀ the blankets, scavenges the bedroom ﬂoor,
looking for her clothes, but there’s no sign of the rainsoaked jeans or shirt, just the familiar leather jacket draped
over a chair. Addie ﬁnds a robe beneath and wraps it around
her, buries her nose in the collar. It is worn and soft, smells
like clean cotton and fabric softener and the faint hint of
coconut shampoo, a smell she will come to know as his.
She pads barefoot into the kitchen as Henry pours coﬀee
from a French press.
He looks up, and smiles. “Good morning.”
Two small words that move the world.
Not I’m sorry. Not I don’t remember. Not I must have
been drunk.
Just good morning.

261

“I put your clothes in the dryer,” he says. “They should be
done soon. Grab yourself a mug.”
Most people have a shelf of cups. Henry has a wall. They
hang from hooks on a mounted rack, ﬁve across and seven
down. Some of them are patterned and some of them are
plain and no two are the same.
“I’m not sure you have enough mugs.”
Henry casts her a sidelong look. He has a way of almost
smiling. It’s like light behind a curtain, the edge of the sun
behind clouds, more a promise than an actual thing, but the
warmth shines through.
“It was a thing, in my family,” he says. “No matter who
came over for coﬀee, they could choose the one that spoke
to them that day.”
His own cup sits on the counter, charcoal gray, the inside
coated in something that looks like liquid silver. A storm
cloud and its lining. Addie studies the wall, trying to make
her choice. She reaches for a large porcelain cup with small
blue leaves, weighs it in her palm before she notices
another. She’s about to put it back when Henry stops her.
“I’m afraid all selections are ﬁnal,” he says, scraping
butter over toast. “You’ll have to try again tomorrow.”
Tomorrow. The word swells a little in her chest.
Henry pours, and Addie leans her elbows on the counter,
wraps her hands around the steaming cup, inhales the
bittersweet scent. For a second, only a second, she is in
Paris, hat pulled down in the corner of the café as Remy
pushed the cup toward her and said, Drink. That is how
memories are for her, past rising into present, a palimpsest
held up to the light.
“Oh, hey,” says Henry, calling her back. “I found this on
the ﬂoor. Is it yours?”
She looks up and sees the wooden ring.

262

“Don’t touch that.” Addie snatches it out of his hand, too
fast. The inside of the ring brushes the tip of her ﬁnger, rolls
around the nail like a coin about to settle, all the ease of a
compass ﬁnding north.
“Shit.” Addie shudders and drops the band. It clatters to
the ﬂoor, rolling several feet before fetching up against the
edge of a rug. She grips her ﬁngers as if burned, heart
pounding.
She didn’t put it on.
And even if she did—her gaze cuts to the window, but it is
morning, sunlight streaming through the curtains. The
darkness cannot ﬁnd her here.
“What happened?” asks Henry, clearly confused.
“Nothing,” she says, shaking out her hand. “Just a
splinter. Stupid thing.” She kneels slowly to retrieve it,
careful to touch only the outside of the band.
“Sorry,” she says, straightening. She sets the ring on the
counter between them, splaying her hands on either side. In
the artiﬁcial light, the pale wood looks almost gray. Addie
glares down at the band.
“Have you ever had something you love, and hate, but
can’t bear to get rid of? Something you almost wish you’d
lose, because then it wouldn’t be there, and it wouldn’t be
your fault…” She tries to make the words light, almost
casual.
“Yeah,” he says quietly. “I do.” He opens a kitchen drawer
and pulls out something small, and gold. A Star of David. A
pendant, missing its chain.
“You’re Jewish?”
“I was.” Two words, and all he means to say. His attention
drifts back to her ring. “It looks old.”
“It is.” Exactly as old as she is.
They both should have worn to nothing long ago.

263

She presses her hand down over the ring, feels the
smooth wooden rim dig into her palm. “It belonged to my
father,” she says, and it isn’t a lie, though it’s only the
beginning of the truth. She closes her hand around the ring,
and pockets it. The ring is weightless, but she can feel it.
She can always feel it.
“Anyway,” she says, with a too-bright smile. “What’s for
breakfast?”

How many times has Addie dreamed of this?
Of hot coﬀee and buttered toast, of sunlight streaming
through the windows, of new days that aren’t fresh starts,
none of the awkward silence of strangers, of a boy or a girl,
elbows on the counter across from her, the simple comfort
of a night remembered.
“You must really love breakfast,” says Henry, and she
realizes she is beaming down at her food.
“It’s my favorite meal,” she answers, spearing a bite of
eggs.
But as she eats, the hope begins to thin.
Addie is not a fool. Whatever this is, she knows it will not
last. She has lived too long to think it chance, been cursed
too long to think it fate.
She has begun to wonder if it is a trap.
Some new way to torment her. To break the stalemate,
force her hand back into play. But even after all these years,
Luc’s voice wraps around her, soft and low and gloating.
I am all you have. All you will ever have. The only one
who will remember.
It was the one card he always held, the weapon of his
own attention, and she does not think he’d give it away. But
if it is not a trap, then what? An accident? A stroke of luck?
Perhaps she has gone mad. It would not be the ﬁrst time.
264

Perhaps she has frozen up on Sam’s roof, and is trapped in a
dream.
Perhaps none of it is real.
And yet, there is his hand on hers, there is the soft scent
of him on the robe, there is the sound of her name, drawing
her back.
“Where did you go?” he asks, and she spears another bite
of food and holds it up between them.
“If you could only eat one thing for the rest of your life,”
she says, “what would it be?”
“Chocolate,” Henry answers without missing a beat. “The
kind so dark it’s almost bitter. You?”
Addie ponders. A life is a very long time. “Cheese,” she
answers soberly, and Henry nods, and silence settles over
them, less awkward than shy. Nervous laughter in between
stolen glances, two strangers who are no longer strangers
but know so little of each other.
“If you could live somewhere with only one season,” asks
Henry, “what would it be?”
“Spring,” she says, “when everything is new.”
“Fall,” he says, “when everything is fading.”
They have both chosen seams, those ragged lines where
things are neither here nor there, but balanced on the brink.
And Addie wonders, half to herself, “Would you rather feel
nothing or everything?”
A shadow crosses Henry’s face, and he falters, looks down
at his unﬁnished food and then to the clock on the wall.
“Shit. I’ve got to get to the store.” He straightens,
dropping his plate in the sink. The last question goes
unanswered.
“I should go home,” says Addie, rising too. “Get changed.
Do some work.”
There is no home, of course, no clothes, no job. But she is
playing the part of a normal girl, a girl who gets to have a

265

normal life, sleep with a boy and wake up to good mornings
instead of who are yous.
Henry ﬁnishes his coﬀee in a single gulp. “How do you go
about ﬁnding talent?” he asks, and Addie remembers she
told him that she was a scout.
“You keep your eyes open,” she says, rounding the
counter.
But he catches her hand.
“I want to see you again.”
“I want you to see me again,” she echoes.
“Still no phone?”
She shakes her head, and he raps his ﬁngers for a
moment, thinking. “There’s a food truck rally in Prospect
Park. Meet you there at six?”
Addie smiles. “It’s a date.” She pulls the robe close. “Mind
if I take a shower before I go?”
Henry kisses her. “Of course. Just let yourself out.”
She smiles. “I will.”
Henry leaves, the front door swinging shut behind him,
but for once, the sound doesn’t make her stomach drop. It’s
just a door. Not a period. An ellipsis. A to-be-continued.
She takes a long, hot shower, wraps her hair in a towel,
and wanders through the apartment, noticing all the things
she didn’t see last night.
Henry’s apartment is just this side of messy, cluttered in
the way so many New York places are, too little space to live
and breathe. It’s also littered with the remains of abandoned
hobbies. A cabinet of oil paints, the brushes gone stale and
stiﬀ in a stained cup. Notebooks and journals, most of them
empty. A few blocks of wood and a whittling knife—
somewhere, in the faded space before her ﬂawless memory,
she hears her father humming, and moves on, moves away,
slowing only when she reaches the cameras.

266

A row of them stare down at her from a shelf, their lenses
large and wide and black.
Vintage, she thinks, though the word has never held
much weight.
She was there when cameras were hulking tripod beasts,
the photographer hidden beneath a heavy drape. She was
there for the invention of black-and-white ﬁlm, and then
color, there when still frames became videos, when analog
became digital, and whole stories could be stored in the
palm of a hand.
She runs her ﬁngers across the camera bodies, like
carapace shells, feels dust beneath her touch. But there are
photographs everywhere.
On the walls, propped on side tables, and sitting in the
corner, waiting to be hung. There is one of Beatrice in an art
gallery, a silhouette against the brightly lit space. One of
Beatrice and Henry, tangled together, her gaze up, and his
head down, each caught in the beginning of a laugh. One of
a boy that Addie guesses must be Robbie. Bea was right; he
looks like he walked out of a party in Andy Warhol’s loft. The
crowd behind him is a blur of bodies, but Robbie is in focus,
mid-laugh, purple glitter tracing his cheekbones, plumes of
green along his nose, gold at his temples.
Another photo, in the hall. Here, the three of them sit on a
sofa, Bea in the middle, Robbie’s legs stretched across her
lap, and Henry on the other side, chin resting lazily on his
hand.
And across the hall, its opposite. A posed family portrait,
stiﬀ against the candids. Again Henry sits on the edge of the
sofa, but more upright, and this time placed beside two
people who are clearly his brother and sister. The girl, a
whirlwind of curls, eyes dancing behind a pair of cat-eye
frames, the model of the mother resting a hand on her
shoulder. The boy, older, sterner, an echo of the father

267

behind the sofa. And the younger son, lean, wary, smiling
the kind of smile that doesn’t reach his eyes.
Henry stares back at Addie, from the photos he’s in, and
the ones he clearly took. She can feel him, the artist in the
frame. She could stay there, studying these pictures, trying
to ﬁnd the truth of him in them, the secret, the answer to
the question going around and around in her head.
But all she sees is someone sad, lost, searching.
She turns her attention to the books.
Henry’s own collection is eclectic, spilling across surfaces
in every room. A shelf in the living room, a narrower one in
the hall, a stack beside his bed, another on the coﬀee table.
Comics stacked over a pile of textbooks with titles like
Reviewing the Covenant and Jewish Theology for the
Postmodern Age. There are novels, biographies, paperbacks
and hardcovers mixed together, some old and fraying,
others brand new. Bookmarks jut up from the pages,
marking a dozen unﬁnished reads.
Her ﬁngers drift down the spines, hover on a squat gold
book. A History of the World in 100 Objects. She wonders if
you can distill a person’s life, let alone human civilization, to
a list of things, wonders if that’s a valid way to measure
worth at all, not by the lives touched, but the things left
behind. She tries to build her own list. A History of Addie
LaRue.
Her father’s bird, lost among the bodies in Paris.
The Place Royale, stolen from Remy’s room.
The wooden ring.
But those things have their mark on her. What of Addie’s
legacy? Her face, ghosted in a hundred works of art. Her
melodies at the heart of a hundred songs. Ideas taking root,
growing wild, the seeds unseen.
Addie continues through the apartment, idle curiosity
giving way to a more purposeful search. She is looking for

268

clues, searching for something, anything, to explain Henry
Strauss.
A laptop sits on the coﬀee table. It boots without a
password prompt, but when Addie brushes her thumb
across the trackpad, the cursor doesn’t move. She taps the
keys absently, but nothing happens.
The technology changes.
The curse stays the same.
Except it doesn’t.
It hasn’t—not entirely.
So she goes from room to room, searching for clues to the
question she cannot seem to answer.
Who are you, Henry Strauss?
In the medicine cabinet, a handful of prescriptions line the
shelf, their names clogged with consonants. Beside them, a
vial of pink pills marked with only a Post-it—a tiny, handdrawn umbrella.
In the bedroom, another bookshelf, a stack of notebooks
in various shapes and sizes.
She turns through, but all of them are blank.
On the windowsill, another, older photo—of Henry and
Robbie. In this one, they are tangled, Robbie’s face pressed
against Henry’s, his forehead resting on Henry’s temple.
There’s something intimate about the pose, the way
Robbie’s eyes are almost closed, the way Henry’s hand
cradles the back of his head, as if holding him up, or holding
him close. The serene curve on Robbie’s mouth. Happy.
Home.
By the bed, an old-fashioned watch sits on the side table.
It has no minute hand, and the hour points just past six,
even though the clock on the wall reads 9:32. She holds it to
her ear, but the battery must be dead.
And then, in the top drawer, a handkerchief, dotted with
blood. When she picks it up, a ring tumbles out. A small

269

diamond set in a platinum band. Addie stares down at the
engagement ring, and wonders who it was for, wonders who
Henry was before he met her, what happened to put him in
her path.
“Who are you?” she whispers to the empty room.
She wraps the ring in the stained kerchief and returns it to
its spot, sliding the drawer shut.

270

VIII
“I take it back,” she says. “If I could only eat one thing for
the rest of my life, it would be these fries.”
Henry laughs and steals a few from the cone in her hand
as they wait in line for gyros. The food trucks form a colorful
stripe along Flatbush, crowds of people queuing for lobster
rolls and grilled cheese, banh mi and kebabs. There’s even a
line for ice-cream sandwiches, even though the warmth has
dropped out of the March air, promising a crisp, cold night.
Addie’s glad she picked up a hat and scarf, traded her ballet
ﬂats for calf-high boots, even as she leans into the warmth
of Henry’s arms, until there’s a break in the falafel queue,
and he ducks away to get in line.
Addie watches him step up to the counter window and
order, watches the middle-aged woman working the truck
as she leans forward, elbows on the sill, watches them talk,
Henry nodding solemnly. The line is growing behind him, but
the woman doesn’t seem to notice. She’s not smiling
exactly; if anything, she looks on the verge of tears as she
reaches out and takes his hand, squeezes it.
“Next!”
Addie blinks, gets to the front of her own line, spends the
last of her stolen cash on a lamb gyro and a blueberry soda,
ﬁnds herself wishing for the ﬁrst time in a while that she had
a credit card, or more to her name than the clothes on her

271

back and the change in her pocket. Wishes that things
didn’t seem to slip through her ﬁngers like sand, that she
could have a thing without stealing it ﬁrst.
“You’re looking at that sandwich like it broke your heart.”
Addie looks up at Henry, cracks a smile. “It looks so
good,” she says. “I’m just thinking of how sad I’ll be when
it’s gone.”
He sighs in mock lament. “The worst part of every meal is
when it ends.”
They take their spoils and stake out a slope of grass just
inside the park, a pool of quickly thinning light. Henry adds
the falafel and an order of dumplings to her gyro and fries,
and they share, trading bites like cards in a game of gin.
Henry reaches for the falafel, and Addie remembers the
woman in the window.
“What was that?” she asks. “Back there at the truck, the
woman working, she looked like she was about to cry. Do
you know her?”
Henry shakes his head. “She said I reminded her of her
son.”
Addie stares at him. It isn’t a lie, she doesn’t think, but it’s
not entirely the truth, either. There’s something he isn’t
saying, but she doesn’t know how to ask. She spears a
dumpling and pops it in her mouth.
Food is one of the best things about being alive.
Not just food. Good food. There is a chasm between
sustenance and satisfaction, and while she spent the better
part of three hundred years eating to stave oﬀ the pangs of
hunger, she has spent the last ﬁfty delighting in the
discovery of ﬂavor. So much of life becomes routine, but
food is like music, like art, replete with the promise of
something new.
She wipes the grease from her ﬁngers and lies back in the
grass beside Henry, feeling wonderfully full. She knows it

272

will not last. That fullness is like everything else in her life. It
always wears away too soon. But here, and now, she
feels … perfect.
She closes her eyes, and smiles, and thinks she could
stay here all night, despite the growing cold, let the dusk
give way to dark, burrow against Henry and hope for stars.
A bright chime sounds in his coat pocket.
Henry answers. “Hey, Bea,” he starts, and then abruptly
sits up. Addie can only hear half the call, but she can guess
at the rest.
“No, of course I didn’t forget. I know, I’m late, I’m sorry.
I’m on my way. Yeah, I remember.”
Henry hangs up, puts his head in his hands.
“Bea’s having a dinner party. And I was meant to bring
dessert.”
He looks back at the food trucks, as if one of them might
hold the answer, looks at the sky, which has gone from dusk
to dim, runs his hands through his hair, lets out a soft and
muttered stream of cursing. But there’s no time to wallow
now, not when he is late.
“Come on,” says Addie, pulling him to his feet. “I know a
place.”

The best French bakery in Brooklyn has no sign.
Marked by only a butter yellow awning, a narrow glass
window between two broad brick storefronts, it belongs to a
man named Michel. Every morning before dawn, he arrives,
and begins the slow assembly of his art. Apple tarts, the
fruit sliced thin as paper, and operas, the tops dusted with
cocoa, and petit fours coated in marzipan and small, piped
roses.
The shop is closed now, but she can see the shadow of its
owner as he moves through the kitchen at its back, and
273

Addie raps her knuckles on the glass door, and waits.
“Are you sure about this?” asks Henry as the shape
shuﬄes forward, cracks the door.
“We are closed,” he says, in a heavy accent, and Addie
slips from English into French as she explains she is a friend
of Delphine’s, and the man softens at the mention of his
daughter’s name, softens more at the sound of his native
tongue, and she understands. She can speak German,
Italian, Spanish, Swiss, but French is diﬀerent, French is
bread baking in her mother’s oven, French is her father’s
hands carving wood, French is Estele murmuring to her
garden.
French is coming home.
“For Delphine,” he answers, opening the door, “anything.”
Inside the small shop, New York falls away, and it is pure
Paris, the taste of sugar and butter still on the air. The cases
are mostly empty now, only a handful of the beautiful
creations lingering on the shelves, bright and sparse as
wildﬂowers in a barren ﬁeld.
She does know Delphine, though the young woman does
not, of course, know her. She knows Michel as well, visits
this shop the way someone else might visit a photograph,
linger on a memory.
Henry hovers a few steps behind as Addie and Michel
make small talk, each contented by the brief respite of the
other’s language, and the patissier places each of the
remaining pastries in a pink box, and hands them to her.
And when she oﬀers to pay, wondering if she can aﬀord the
cost, Michel shakes his head, and thanks her for the taste of
home, and she wishes him good night, and back on the
curb, Henry stares at her as if she’s performed a magic act,
some strange and wondrous feat.
He pulls her into the circle of his arms.

274

“You are amazing,” he says, and she blushes, having
never had an audience.
“Here,” she says, pressing the pastry box into his hands.
“Enjoy the party.”
Henry’s smile falls. His forehead rucks up like a carpet.
“Why don’t you come with me?”
And she doesn’t know how to say I can’t when there is no
explaining why, when she was ready to spend all night with
him. So she says, “I shouldn’t,” and he says, “Please,” and
she knows it is such a terrible idea, that she cannot hold the
secret of her curse aloft over so many heads, knows she
cannot keep him to herself, that this is all a game of
borrowed time.
But this is how you walk to the end of the world.
This is how you live forever.
Here is one day, and here is the next, and the next, and
you take what you can, savor every stolen second, cling to
every moment, until it’s gone.
So she says yes.

They walk, arm in arm, as the evening goes from cool to
cold.
“Is there anything I should know?” she says. “About your
friends?”
Henry frowns, thinking. “Well, Robbie’s a performer. He’s
really good, but he can be a little … diﬃcult?” He exhales a
hard breath. “We were together, back in college. He was the
ﬁrst guy I ever fell for.”
“But it didn’t work out?”
Henry laughs, but the breath is shallow. “No. He dumped
me. But look, it was ages ago. We’re friends now, nothing
more.” He shakes his head, as if clearing it. “Then there’s

275

Bea, you met her. She’s great. She’s getting her PhD, and
she lives with a guy named Josh.”
“Are they dating?”
Henry snorts. “No. Bea’s gay. And so is he … I think. I
don’t actually know, it’s been the topic of speculation. But
Bea will probably invite Mel, or Elise, whichever she’s dating
now—it’s kind of a pendulum swing. Oh, and don’t ask about
the Professor.” Addie looks at him, wondering, and he
explains. “Bea had a thing, a few years ago, with a Columbia
professor. Bea was in love, but she was married, and it all
fell apart.”
Addie repeats the names to herself, and Henry smiles.
“It’s not a test,” he says. “You can’t fail.”
Addie wishes he were right.
Henry winds a little tighter at her side. He hesitates,
exhales. “There’s something else you should know,” he says
at last, “about me.”
Her heart stutters in her chest as she braces for a
confession, a reluctant truth, some explanation for this, for
them. But Henry only looks up at the starless night and
says, “There was a girl.”
A girl. It does not answer anything.
“Her name was Tabitha,” he says, and she can feel the
pain in every syllable. She thinks of the ring in his drawer,
the bloody kerchief knotted around it.
“What happened?”
“I proposed, and she said no.”
It is true, she thinks, some version of it. But Addie is
beginning to realize how good Henry is at skirting lies while
leaving truths half-told.
“We all have battle scars,” she says. “People in our past.”
“You too?” he asks, and for a moment, she is in New
Orleans, the room in disarray, those green eyes black with
rage as the building begins to burn.

276

“Yeah,” she says softly. And then, gently probing, “And we
all have secrets, too.”
He looks at her, and she can see it swimming in his eyes,
the thing he will not say, but he is not Luc, and the green
gives nothing away.
Tell me, she thinks. Whatever it is.
But he doesn’t.
They reach Bea’s building in silence, and she buzzes them
in, and as they climb the stairs she turns her thoughts to the
party, and thinks, perhaps, it will be okay.
Perhaps, they will remember her, at the end of this
evening.
Perhaps, if he is with her—
Perhaps—
But then the door opens, and Bea stands there, oven
mitts on hips, voices spilling through the apartment behind
her as she says, “Henry Strauss, you are so late, that better
be dessert.” And Henry holds out the pastry box as if it were
a shield, but as Bea plucks the box from his hands, she
looks past him. “And who’s this?”
“This is Addie,” he says. “You met in the shop.”
Bea rolls her eyes. “Henry, you really don’t have enough
friends to be getting us mixed up. Besides,” she says,
ﬂashing Addie a crooked smile, “I wouldn’t forget a face like
yours. There’s something … timeless about it.”
Henry’s frown deepens. “You have met, and that’s exactly
what you said.” He looks to Addie. “You remember this,
don’t you?”
She hesitates, caught between the impossible truth and
the easier lie, begins to shake her head. “I’m sorry, I—”
But Addie’s saved by the arrival of a girl in a yellow
sundress, a bold deﬁance of the chill beyond the windows,
and Henry whispers in her ear that this is Elise. The girl
kisses Bea and plucks the box from her hands, and says she

277

cannot ﬁnd the wine opener, and Josh appears to take their
coats, and usher them through.
The apartment is a converted loft, one of those open ﬂoor
plans where the hall runs into the living room and the living
room runs into the kitchen, and it is all mercifully free of
walls and doors.
The buzzer rings again, and moments later a boy arrives
like a comet crashing through the atmosphere, a bottle of
wine in one hand and a scarf in the other. And even though
Addie has only seen him in photos on Henry’s wall, she
knows instantly that this is Robbie.
He sweeps through the front hallway, kissing Bea on the
cheek, waves at Josh and hugs Elise, and turns toward
Henry, only to notice her.
“Who are you?” he says.
“Don’t be rude,” answers Henry. “This is Addie.”
“Henry’s date,” adds Bea, and Addie wishes she hadn’t,
because the words are like cold water over Robbie’s mood.
Henry must see it too, because he takes her hand and says,
“Addie’s a talent scout.”
“Oh?” asks Robbie, rekindling a little. “What kind?”
“Art. Music. All sorts.”
He frowns. “Don’t scouts usually specialize in
something?”
Bea elbows him. “Be nice,” she says, reaching for the
wine.
“Didn’t know I was supposed to bring a date,” he says,
following her into the kitchen.
She pats his shoulder. “You can borrow Josh.”
The dining table sits between the sofa and the kitchen
counter, and Bea sets an extra place as Henry opens the
ﬁrst two bottles of wine, and Robbie pours, and Josh carries
a salad to the table and Elise checks the lasagna in the oven
and Addie stays out of the way.

278

She is used to having all of the attention, or none of it. To
being the brief but sunlit center of a stranger’s world, or a
shadow at its edges. This is diﬀerent. This is new.
“Hope you’re all hungry,” says Bea, setting lasagna and
garlic bread in the center of the table.
Henry grimaces a little at the sight of the pasta, and
Addie almost laughs, remembering their food truck feast.
She is always hungry, the last meal nothing but a memory
now, and she gratefully accepts a plate.

279

Paris, France
July 29, 1751

IX
A woman alone is a scandalous sight.
And yet, Addie has come to revel in the whispers. She sits
in the Tuileries, skirts spread around her on the bench, and
thumbs the pages of her book, and knows that she is being
watched. Or rather, being stared at. But what is the point of
worrying? A woman sitting alone in the sun is not a crime,
and it’s not as though the rumors will spread beyond the
park. Passersby will, perhaps, be startled, and make note of
the strangeness, but they will all forget before they have the
chance to gossip.
She turns the page, lets her eyes travel across the printed
words. These days, Addie steals books as eagerly as food, a
vital piece of daily nourishment. And while she prefers
novels to philosophers—adventures and escapes—this
particular one is a prop, a key, designed to gain her entry to
a speciﬁc door.
She has timed her presence in the park, seated herself at
the garden’s edge along the route she knows Madame
Geoﬀrin tends to favor. And when the woman comes
ambling down the path, she knows just what to do.
She turns the page, pretending to be engrossed.
Out of the corner of her eye, Addie can see the woman
coming, her handmaid a step behind, her arms full of
ﬂowers, and she rises to her feet, eyes still cast upon her

280

book, turns, and makes two strides before the inevitable
collision, careful not to knock the woman down, but simply
startle her, while the book falls onto the path between
them.
“Foolish thing,” snaps Madame Geoﬀrin.
“I’m so sorry,” says Addie at the same time. “Are you
hurt?”
“No,” says the woman, dropping her gaze from her
attacker to the book. “And what has you so distracted?”
The handmaid scoops up the fallen book and passes it to
her mistress.
Geoﬀrin considers the title.
Pensées Philosophiques.
“Diderot,” she observes. “And who taught you to read
such lofty things as this?”
“My father taught me.”
“Himself? You fortunate girl.”
“It was a start,” answers Addie, “but a woman must take
responsibility for her own education, for no man truly will.”
“How true,” says Geoﬀrin.
They are playing out a script, though the other woman
does not know it. Most people have only one chance to
make a ﬁrst impression, but luckily, Addie has by now had
several.
The older woman frowns. “But out in the park with no
maidservant? No chaperone? Don’t you worry that people
will talk?”
A deﬁant smile ﬂashes across Addie’s lips. “I suppose I
prefer my freedom to my reputation.”
Madame Geoﬀrin laughs, a short sound, more surprise
than amusement. “My dear, there are ways to buck the
system, and ways to play it. What is your name?”
“Marie Christine,” answers Addie, “La Trémoille,” she
adds, savoring the way the woman’s eyes widen in

281

response. She has spent a month learning the names of
noble families, and their proximity to Paris, pruning the ones
that might invite too many questions, ﬁnding a tree with
broad enough limbs that a cousin might go unnoticed. And
thankfully, while the salonnière prides herself on knowing
everyone, she cannot know all of them equally.
“La Trémoille. Mais non!” says Madame Geoﬀrin, but there
is no disbelief in the words, only surprise. “I shall have to
chastise Charles for keeping you a secret.”
“You must,” says Addie with a sheepish grin, knowing it
will never come to that. “Well, madame,” she continues,
holding her hand out for the book. “I should go. I would not
want to hurt your reputation, too.”
“Nonsense,” says Geoﬀrin, eyes glittering with pleasure.
“I am quite immune to scandal.” She hands Addie back her
book, but the gesture is not one of parting. “You must come
to my salon. Your Diderot will be there.”
Addie hesitates, the barest fraction of a second. She
made a mistake, the last time they crossed paths, when she
settled on an air of false humility. But she has since learned
that the salonnière prefers women who stand their ground,
and so this time she smiles in delight. “I would like that very
much.”
“Superb,” says Madame Geoﬀrin. “Come around in an
hour.”
And here, her weaving must become precise. One slipped
stitch, and it will fall apart.
Addie looks down at herself. “Oh,” she says, letting
disappointment sweep across her face. “I fear I don’t have
time to go home and change, but surely this won’t be
appropriate.”
She holds her breath, waiting for the other woman to
answer, and when she does, it is to extend her arm. “Don’t

282

bother,” she says. “I’m sure my ladies will ﬁnd something
that suits you.”
They walk together through the park, the maidservant
trailing behind.
“Why have we never crossed paths before? We know
everyone of note.”
“I’m not of note,” demurs Addie. “And then I’m only
visiting for the summer.”
“Your accent is pure Paris.”
“Time and practice,” she answers, and it is, of course,
true.
“And yet, you are unmarried?”
Another turn, another test. Times before Addie has been
widowed, has been wed, but today, she decides, she is
unmarriable.
“No,” she says, “I confess, I do not want a master, and
I’ve yet to ﬁnd an equal.”
That earns a smile from her hostess.
The questioning continues all the way past the park and
up to rue Saint-Honoré, when the woman ﬁnally peels away
to ready for her salon.
Addie watches the salonnière go with some regret.
From here, she is on her own.
The maidservant leads her upstairs, and lays a dress from
the nearest wardrobe out on the bed. It is a brocaded silk, a
patterned shift, a layer of lace around the collar. Nothing
she would choose herself, but it is very ﬁne. Addie has seen
a piece of meat trussed up with herbs and readied for the
oven, and it reminds her of the current French fashion.
Addie sits before a mirror and adjusts her hair, listening to
the doors open and close downstairs, the house stirring with
the motions of arriving guests. She must wait for the salon
to be in bloom, the rooms crowded enough that she will
blend in among them.

283

Addie adjusts her hair a ﬁnal time, and smooths her
skirts, and when the sound below becomes a steady enough
thing, the voices tangling with the clink of glassware, she
goes down the stairs to the main room.
The ﬁrst time Addie ended up in the salon, it was by luck,
not staging. She was amazed to ﬁnd a place where a woman
was allowed to speak, or at least to listen, where she could
move alone without judgment or condescension. She
enjoyed the food, the drink, the conversation, and the
company. Could pretend to be among friends instead of
strangers.
Until she rounded a corner and saw Remy Laurent.
There he was, perched on a footstool between Voltaire
and Rousseau, waving his hands as he spoke, ﬁngers still
stained gray with ink.
Seeing him was like missing a step, like fabric snagging
on a nail.
A moment thrown oﬀ-balance.
Her lover had grown stiﬀ with age, the diﬀerence between
twenty-three and ﬁfty-one marked in the lines of his face. A
brow furrowed from hours reading, a pair of spectacles now
balanced on his nose. But then some topic would spark the
light in his eyes, and she would see the boy he’d been, the
passionate youth who came to Paris to ﬁnd this, great minds
with great ideas.
There is no sign of him today.
Addie lifts a glass of wine from a low table, and moves
from room to room like a shadow cast against the wall,
unnoticed, but at ease. She listens, and makes pleasant
conversation, and feels herself among the folds of history.
She meets a naturalist with a fondness for marine life, and
when she confesses she has never been to the sea, he
spends the next half hour regaling her with tales of
crustacean life, and it is a very pleasant way to pass the

284

afternoon, and indeed the night—this night, more than
most, in need of such distraction.
It has been six years—but she doesn’t want to think of it,
of him.
As the sun goes down, and wine is swapped for port, she
is having a lovely time, enjoying the company of the
scientists, the men of letters.
She should have known then, that he would ruin it.
Luc steps into the room like a gust of cool wind, dressed
in shades of gray and black, from his boots to his cravat.
Those green eyes, the only drop of color on him.
Six years, and relief is the wrong word for what Addie
feels at the sight of him, and yet, it is the closest one. The
sensation of a weight set down, a breath expelled, a body
sighing in relief. There is no pleasure in it, beyond the
simple, physical release—the relief of trading the unknown
for the certain.
She was waiting, and now she is not.
No, now she is braced for trouble, for grief.
“Monsieur Lebois,” says Madame Geoﬀrin, greeting her
guest, and Addie wonders, for a moment, if their crossing
paths is only a coincidence, if her shadow favors the salon,
the minds fostering within—but the men who ﬂock here
worship progress instead of gods. And already, Luc’s
attention has ﬁxed squarely on her, his face suﬀused with a
coy and menacing light.
“Madame,” he says in a voice loud enough to carry, “I
fear you have opened your doors too wide.”
Addie’s stomach drops, and Madame Geoﬀrin draws back
a little, as the conversation in the room seems to peter, still.
“What do you mean?”
She tries to back away, but the salon is crowded, the path
muddled by legs and chairs.

285

“That woman, there.” Heads begin to turn in Addie’s
direction. “Do you know her?” Madame Geoﬀrin does not, of
course, not anymore, but she’s too well-bred to
acknowledge such a misstep.
“My salon is open to many, monsieur.”
“This time you have been too generous,” says Luc. “That
woman is a swindler and a thief. A truly wretched creature.
Look,” he gestures, “she even wears one of your own
gowns. Better check the pockets, and make sure that she
hasn’t stolen more than the cloth from your back.”
And just like that, he has turned her game into his own.
Addie starts toward the door, but there are men around
her, on their feet.
“Stop her,” announces Geoﬀrin, and she has no choice
but to abandon it all, to rush for the door, to push past
them, out of the salon and into the night.
No one comes after her, of course.
Except for Luc.
The darkness follows on her heels, chuckling softly.
She rounds on him. “I thought you had better things to do
than plague me.”
“And yet I ﬁnd the task so entertaining.”
She shakes her head. “This is nothing. You have marred
one moment, ruined one night, but because of my gift, I
have a million more; inﬁnite chances to reinvent myself. I
could walk back in right now, and your slights would be as
forgotten as my face.”
Mischief glints in those green eyes. “I think you’ll ﬁnd my
word won’t fade as fast as yours.” He shrugs. “They will not
remember you, of course. But ideas are so much wilder than
memories, so much faster to take root.”
It will be ﬁfty years before she realizes that he is right.
Ideas are wilder than memories.
And she can plant them, too.

286

New York City
March 16, 2014

X
There is a magic to this evening.
A deﬁant pleasure in a simple act.
Addie spends the ﬁrst hour holding her breath, bracing for
catastrophe, but somewhere between the salad and the
main course, between the ﬁrst glass and the second, she
exhales. Sitting there, between Henry and Elise, between
warmth and laughter, she can almost believe that it is real,
that she belongs, a normal girl beside a normal boy at a
normal dinner party. She and Bea talk about art, and she
and Josh talk about Paris, and she and Elise talk about wine,
and Henry’s hand ﬁnds her knee beneath the table, and it is
all so wonderfully simple and warm. She wants to hold the
night like a chocolate on her tongue, savor every second
before it melts.
Only Robbie seems unhappy, even though Josh has been
trying to ﬂirt with him all night. He shifts in his seat, a
performer in search of a spotlight. He drinks too much, too
fast, unable to sit still for more than a few minutes. It is the
same restless energy Addie saw in Henry, but tonight, he
seems perfectly at ease.
Once, Elise goes to the bathroom, and Addie thinks that’s
it, the domino that tips the rest. And sure enough, when she
returns to the table, Addie can see the confusion on the
girl’s face, but it is the kind of embarrassment you cover

287

instead of show, and she says nothing, only shakes her head
as if to clear a thought, and smiles, and Addie imagines her
wondering if she’s had too much to drink, imagines her
pulling Beatrice aside before dessert and whispering that
she cannot remember her name.
Robbie and their hostess, meanwhile, are deep in
conversation.
“Bea,” he whines. “Can’t we just—”
“My party, my rules. When it was your birthday, we went
to a sex club in Bushwick.”
Robbie rolls his eyes. “It was an exhibitionist-themed
music venue.”
“It was a sex club,” Henry and Bea say at the same time.
“Wait.” Addie leans forward in her seat. “Is it your
birthday?”
“No,” says Bea emphatically.
“Beatrice hates birthdays,” explains Henry. “She won’t tell
us when hers is. The closest we’ve gotten is that it’s in April.
Or March. Or May. So any dinner party in the spring could
conceivably be the one nearest to her birthday.”
Bea sips her wine and shrugs. “I don’t see the point. It’s
just a day. Why put all this pressure on it?”
“So you can get presents, obviously,” says Robbie.
“I understand,” says Addie. “The nicest days are always
the ones we don’t plan.”
Robbie glowers. “What did you say your name was?
Andy?”
And she goes to correct him, only to feel the letters lodge
in her throat. The curse coils tight, strangling the word.
“It’s Addie,” says Henry. “And you’re being an ass.”
A nervous current runs across the table, and Elise, clearly
looking to smooth the energy, cuts into a petit four and
says, “This dessert is amazing, Henry.”
And he says, “It was all Addie’s doing.”

288

And that is enough to tip Robbie like a glass, and send
him spilling over. He shoves up from the table with a rush of
breath.
“I need a smoke.”
“Not in here,” says Bea. “Take it to the roof.”
And Addie knows that is the end of this beautiful night,
the door slamming shut, because she cannot stop them,
and once she’s out of sight—
Josh rises. “I could use one, too.”
“You just want to get out of doing dishes,” says Bea, but
the two of them are already heading for the door, out of
sight and out of mind, and this, she thinks, is midnight, this
is how the magic ends, this is how you turn back into a
pumpkin.
“I should go,” she says.
Bea tries to convince her to stay, says to not let Robbie
get to her, and Addie says that it’s not his fault, that it’s
been a long day, says thank you for the lovely meal, thank
you for the company; and really, she was lucky to get this
far, lucky to have this time, this night, this tiny glimpse of
normal.
“Addie, wait,” says Henry, but she kisses him, quick, and
slips away, out of the apartment, and down the steps and
into the dark.
She sighs, and slows, her lungs aching in the sudden cold.
And despite the doors and walls between them, she can feel
the weight of what she left behind, and she wishes she
could have stayed, wishes that when Henry had said Wait,
she had said, Come with me, but she knows it is not fair to
make him choose. He is full of roots, while she has only
branches.
And then she hears the steps behind her, and slows,
shivers, even now, after all this time, expecting Luc.
Luc, who always knew when she brittle.

289

But it is not the darkness, only a boy with fogging glasses
and an open coat.
“You left so fast,” says Henry.
“You caught up,” says Addie.
And perhaps she should feel guilty, but she is only
grateful.
She has gotten good at losing things.
But Henry is still here.
“Friends are messy sometimes, aren’t they?”
“Yeah,” she says, even though she has no idea.
“I’m sorry,” he says, nodding back at the building. “I don’t
know what got into him.”
But Addie does.
Live long enough, and people open up like books. Robbie
is a romance novel. A tale of broken hearts. He is so clearly
lovesick.
“You said you were just friends.”
“We are,” he insists. “I love him like family, I always will.
But I don’t—I never…”
She thinks of the photo, Robbie’s head bowed against
Henry’s cheek, thinks of the look on his face when Bea said
she was his date, and wonders how he doesn’t see it.
“He’s still in love with you.”
Henry deﬂates. “I know,” he says. “But I can’t love him
back.”
Can’t. Not won’t. Not shouldn’t.
Addie looks at Henry, meets him eye to eye.
“Is there anything else you want to tell me?”
She doesn’t know what she expects him to say, what
truth could possibly explain his enduring presence, but for a
second, when he looks back at her, there is a brief and
blinding sadness.
But then he pulls her close and groans, and says, in a soft
and vanquished voice, “I am so full.”

290

And Addie laughs despite herself.
It is too cold to stand, and so they walk together through
the dark, and she doesn’t even notice they have reached his
place until she sees the blue door. She is so tired, and he is
so warm; she does not want to go, and he does not ask her
to.

291

New York City
March 17, 2014

XI
Addie has woken up a hundred ways.
To frost forming on her skin, and a sun so hot it should
have burned. To empty places, and ones that should have
been. To wars raging overhead, and the ocean rocking
against the hull. To sirens, and city noise, and silence, and
once, a snake coiled by her head.
But Henry Strauss wakes her with kisses.
He plants them one by one, like ﬂower bulbs, lets them
blossom on her skin. Addie smiles, and rolls against him,
pulls his arms around her like a cloak.
The darkness whispers in her head, Without me, you will
always be alone.
But instead, she listens to the sound of Henry’s heart, to
the soft murmur of his voice in her hair as he asks if she is
hungry.
It is late, and he should be at work, but he tells her The
Last Word is closed on Mondays. He can’t possibly know that
she remembers the little wooden sign, the hours next to
every day. The shop is only closed on Thursdays.
She doesn’t correct him.
They pull on clothes, and amble down to the corner shop,
where Henry buys egg and cheese rolls from the counter
and Addie wanders to the case in search of juice.
And that is when she hears the bell.

292

That is when she sees a tawny head, and a familiar face,
as Robbie stumbles in. That is when her heart drops, the
way it does when you miss a step, the sudden lurch of a
body oﬀ-balance.
Addie has gotten good at losing—
But she isn’t ready.
And she wants to stop time, to hide, to disappear.
But for once, she can’t. Robbie sees Henry, and Henry
sees her, and they are in a triangle of one-way streets. A
comedy of memory and absence and terrible luck as Henry
wraps an arm around her waist, and Robbie looks at Addie
with ice in his eyes and says, “Who’s this?”
“That’s not funny,” says Henry. “Are you still drunk?”
Robbie draws back, indignant. “I’m—what? No. I’ve never
seen this girl. You never said you met someone.”
It is a car crash in slow motion, and Addie knew it was
bound to happen, the inevitable collision of people and
place, time and circumstance.
Henry is an impossible thing, her strange and beautiful
oasis. But he is also human, and humans have friends, have
families, have a thousand strands tying them to other
people. Unlike her, he has never been untethered, never
existed in a void.
So it was inevitable.
But she still isn’t ready.
“Fuck’s sake, Rob, you just met her.”
“Pretty sure I’d remember.” Robbie’s eyes darken. “But
then again, these days, it’s kind of hard to keep them
straight.”
The space between them collapses as Henry steps in.
Addie gets there ﬁrst, catches his hand as it lifts, pulls him
back. “Henry, stop.”
It was such a lovely jar she had kept them in. But the
glass is cracking now. The water leaking through.

293

Robbie looks at Henry, stunned, betrayed. And she
understands. It is not fair. It is never fair.
“Come on,” she says, squeezing his hand.
Henry’s attention ﬁnally drags toward her. “Please,” she
says. “Come with me.”
They spill out into the street, the morning’s peace
forgotten, left behind with the OJ and the sandwiches.
Henry is shaking with anger. “I’m sorry,” he says. “Robbie
can be an ass but that was—”
Addie closes her eyes, sinks back against the wall. “It’s
not his fault.” She could salvage this, hold the breaking jar,
keep her ﬁngers over the cracks. But how long? How long
can she keep Henry to herself? How long can she keep him
from noticing the curse?
“I don’t think he remembered me.”
Henry squints, clearly confused. “How could he not?”
Addie hesitates.
It is easy to be honest when there are no wrong words,
because the words don’t stick. When whatever you say
belongs to only you.
But Henry is diﬀerent, he hears her, he remembers, and
suddenly every word is full of weight, honesty such a heavy
thing.
She only has one chance.
She can lie to him, like she would anyone else, but if she
starts, she’ll never be able to stop, and even more than that
—she doesn’t want to lie to him. She’s waited too long to be
heard, seen.
So Addie throws herself into the truth.
“You know how some people have face blindness? They
look at friends, family, people they’ve known their whole
lives, and they don’t recognize them?”
Henry frowns. “In theory, sure…”
“Well, I have the opposite.”

294

“You remember everyone?”
“No,” says Addie. “I mean yes, I do, but that’s not what
I’m talking about. It’s that—people forget me. Even if we’ve
met a hundred times. They forget.”
“That doesn’t make any sense.”
It doesn’t. Of course it doesn’t.
“I know,” she says, “but it’s the truth. If we went back in
that store right now, Robbie wouldn’t remember. You could
introduce me, but the moment I walked away, the moment I
was out of sight, he’d forget again.”
Henry shakes his head. “How? Why?”
The smallest questions. The biggest answer.
Because I was a fool.
Because I was afraid.
Because I wasn’t careful.
“Because,” she says, slumping back against the concrete
wall. “I’m cursed.”
Henry stares at her, brow furrowed behind his glasses. “I
don’t understand.”
Addie takes a deep breath, trying to steady her nerves.
And then, because she has decided to tell the truth, that’s
what she does.
“My name is Addie LaRue. I was born in Villon in the year
1691, my parents were Jean and Marthe, and we lived in a
stone house just beyond an old yew tree…”

295

Villon-sur-Sarthe, France
July 29, 1764

XII
The cart rattles to a stop beside the river.
“I can take you further,” says the driver, gripping the
reins. “We’re still a mile out.”
“That’s all right,” she says. “I know the way.”
An unknown cart and driver might draw attention, and
Addie would rather return the way she left, the way she
learned every inch of this place: on foot.
She pays the man and steps down, the edge of her gray
cloak skimming the dirt. She hasn’t bothered with luggage,
has learned to travel light; or rather, to let go of things as
easily as she comes into them. It is simpler that way. Things
are too hard to hold on to.
“You’re from here, then?” he asks, and Addie squints into
the sun.
“I am,” she says. “But I’ve been gone a long time.”
The driver looks her up and down. “Not too long.”
“You’d be surprised,” she says, and then he cracks the
whip, and the cart trundles oﬀ, and she is alone again in a
land she knows, down to her bones. A place she has not
been in ﬁfty years.
Strange—twice as long away as she was here, and still it
feels like home.
She doesn’t know when she made the decision to come
back, or even how, only that it had been building in her like

296

a storm, from the time spring began to feel like summer, the
heaviness rolling in like the promise of rain, until she could
see the dark clouds on the horizon, hear the thunder in her
head, urging her to go.
Perhaps it is a ritual of sorts, this return. A way to cleanse
herself, to set Villon ﬁrmly in the past. Perhaps she is trying
to let go. Or perhaps she is trying to hold on.
She will not stay, that much she knows.
Sunlight glints on the surface of the Sarthe, and for an
instant, she thinks of praying, sinking her hands into the
shallow stream, but she has nothing to oﬀer the river gods
now, and nothing to say to them. They did not answer when
it mattered.
Around the bend, and beyond a copse of trees, Villon rises
amid the shallow hills, gray stone houses nestled in the
basin of the valley. It has grown, a little, widened like a man
in middle age, inching outward, but it is still Villon. There is
the church, and the town square, and there, beyond the
center of the town, the dark green line of the woods.
She does not go through town, instead bends around it to
the south.
Toward home.
The old yew tree still stands sentinel at the end of the
lane. Fifty years have added a few knotted angles to its
limbs, a measure of width around its base, but otherwise, it
is the same. And for an instant, when all she can see is the
edge of the house, time stutters, and slips, and she is
twenty-three again, walking home from the town, or the
river, or Isabelle’s, washing on her hip, or the drawing pad
under her arm, and any moment she will see her mother in
the open doorway, ﬂour powdering her wrists, will hear the
steady chop of her father’s ax, the soft hush of their mare,
Maxime, swishing her tail and munching grass.

297

But then she nears the house, and the illusion crumbles
back into memory. The horse is gone, of course, and in the
yard, her father’s workshop now leans tiredly to one side,
while across the weedy grass, her parents’ cottage sits, dark
and still.
What did she expect?
Fifty years. Addie knew they would no longer be there,
but the sight of this place, decaying, abandoned, still
unnerves her. Her feet move of their own accord, carrying
her down the dirt lane, through the yard to the sloping ruins
of her father’s shop.
She eases the door open—the wood is rotted, crumbling—
and steps into the shed.
Sunlight streams through the broken boards, striping the
dark, and the air smells of decay instead of fresh-scraped
wood, earthy and sweet; every surface is covered in mold,
and damp, and dust. Tools her father sharpened every day
now lie abandoned, rusted brown and red. The shelves are
mostly empty; the wooden birds are gone, but a large bowl
sits, half-ﬁnished, beneath a curtain of cobwebs and grime.
She runs her hand through the dust, watches it gather
again in her wake.
How long has he been gone?
She forces herself back out into the yard, and stops.
The house has come to life, or at least, begun to stir. A
thin ribbon of smoke rises from the chimney. A window sits
open, thin curtains rippling softly in the draft.
Someone is still here.
She should go, she knows she should, this place isn’t
hers, not anymore, but she is already crossing the yard,
already reaching out to knock. Her ﬁngers slow,
remembering that night, the last one of another life.
She hovers there, on the step, willing her hand to choose
—but she has already announced herself. The curtain

298

ﬂutters, a shadow crossing the window, and Addie can only
retreat two steps, three, before the door opens a crack. Just
enough to reveal a sliver of wrinkled cheek, a scowling blue
eye.
“Who’s there?”
The woman’s voice is brittle, thin, but it still lands like a
stone in Addie’s chest, knocks the air away, and she is sure
that even if she were mortal, her mind softened by time, she
would still remember this—the sound of her mother’s voice.
The door groans open, and there she is, withered like a
plant in winter, gnarled ﬁngers clutching a threadbare
shawl. She is old, anciently so, but alive.
“Do I know you?” asks her mother, but there is no hint of
recognition in her voice, only the doubt of the old and the
unsure.
Addie shakes her head.
Afterward, she will wonder if she should have answered
yes, if her mother’s mind, emptied of memory, could have
made room for that one truth. If she might have invited her
daughter in, to sit beside the hearth, and share a simple
meal, so that when Addie left, she would have something to
hold on to besides the version of her mother shutting her
out.
But she doesn’t.
She tries to tell herself that this woman stopped being her
mother when she stopped being her daughter, but of
course, it doesn’t work that way. And yet, it must. She has
already grieved, and though the shock of the woman’s face
is sharp, the pain is shallow.
“What do you want?” demands Marthe LaRue.
And that is another question she can’t answer, because
she doesn’t know. She looks past the old woman, into the
dim hall that used to be her home, and only then does a
strange hope rise inside her chest. If her mother is alive,

299

then maybe, maybe—but she knows. Knows by the cobwebs
in the workshop door, the dust on the half-ﬁnished bowl.
Knows by the weary look in her mother’s face, and the dark,
disheveled state of the cottage behind her.
“I’m sorry,” she says, backing away.
And the woman does not ask what for, only stares,
unblinking as she goes.
The door groans shut, and Addie knows, as she walks
away, that she will never see her mother again.

300

New York City
March 17, 2014

XIII
It is easy enough to say the words.
After all, the story has never been the hard part.
It is a secret she has tried to share so many times, with
Isabelle, and Remy, with friends and strangers and anyone
who might listen, and every time, she has watched their
expressions ﬂatten, their faces go blank, watched the words
hang in the air before her like smoke before being blown
away.
But Henry looks at her, and listens.
He listens as she tells him of the wedding, and the
prayers that went unanswered, the oﬀerings made at dawn,
and dusk. Of the darkness in the woods, parading as a man,
of her wish, and his refusal, and her mistake.
You can have my soul when I don’t want it anymore.
Listens as she tells him of living forever, and being
forgotten, and giving up. When she ﬁnishes, she holds her
breath, expecting Henry to blink away the fog, to ask what
she was about to say. Instead, his eyes narrow with such
peculiar focus, and she realizes, heart racing, that he has
heard every word.
“You made a deal?” he says. There is a detachment in his
voice, an unnerving calm.
And of course, it sounds like madness.
Of course, he does not believe her.

301

This is how she loses him. Not to memory, but to disbelief.
And then, out of nowhere, Henry laughs.
He sags against a bike rack, head in his hand, and laughs,
and she thinks he’s gone mad, thinks she’s broken
something in him, thinks, even, that he is mocking her.
But it is not the kind of laughter that follows a joke.
It is too manic, too breathless.
“You made a deal,” he says again.
She swallows. “Look, I know how it sounds but—”
“I believe you.”
She blinks, suddenly confused. “What?”
“I believe you,” he says again.
Three small words, as rare as I remember you, and it
should be enough—but it’s not. Nothing makes sense, not
Henry, not this; it hasn’t since the start and she’s been too
afraid to ask, to know, as if knowing would bring the whole
dream crashing down, but she can see the cracks in his
shoulders, can feel them in her chest.
Who are you? she wants to ask. Why are you diﬀerent?
How do you remember when no one else can? Why do you
believe I made a deal?
In the end, she says only one thing.
“Why?”
And Henry’s hands fall away from his face and he looks
up at her, his green eyes fever bright, and says—
“Because I made one, too.”

302

303

PART FOUR
THE MAN WHO STAYED DRY IN THE
RAIN

304

Title: Open to Love
Artist(s): Muriel Strauss (design) and Lance Harringer (manufacture)
Date: 2011
Medium: Aluminum, steel, and glass sculpture
Location: On loan from the Tisch School of the Arts
Description: Originally displayed as an interactive installation, in which
the aluminum heart, perforated by small holes, hung suspended over a
bucket. On a table beside the metal heart, jars of varying shapes and
sizes contained diﬀerent-colored liquids, some water, some alcohol,
some paint, and participants were encouraged to select one of the glass
jars, and empty the contents into the heart. The liquid instantly began to
leak out, with a speed dependent on the viscosity of the substance
poured.
Background: This sculpture formed the central piece of Strauss’s
senior portfolio, a collection of work on the theme of family. At the time,
Strauss did not specify which member of her family was paired with
which piece, but insisted that Open to Love was designed as “an
homage to the exhaustions of serial monogamy and a testament to the
dangers of unbalanced aﬀection.”
Estimated Value: Unknown; work was given to Tisch by artist for
permanent installation

305

New York City
September 4, 2013

I
A boy is born with a broken heart.
The doctors go in, and piece it back together, make it
whole, and the baby is sent home, lucky to be alive. They
say he is better now, that he can live a normal life, and yet,
as he grows up, he is convinced something is still wrong
inside.
The blood pumps, the valves open and close, and on the
scans and screens, everything functions as it should. But
something isn’t right.
They’ve left his heart too open.
Forgotten to close back up the armor of his chest.
And now he feels … too much.
Other people would call him sensitive, but it is more than
that. The dial is broken, the volume turned all the way up.
Moments of joy register as brief, but ecstatic. Moments of
pain stretch long and unbearably loud.
When his ﬁrst dog dies, Henry cries for a week. When his
parents argue, and he cannot bear the violence in their
words, he runs away from home. It takes more than a day to
bring him back. When David throws away his childhood
bear, when his ﬁrst girlfriend, Abigail, stands him up at the
dance, when they have to dissect a pig in class, when he
loses the card his grandfather gave him before he passed,
when he ﬁnds Liz cheating on him during their senior trip,

306

when Robbie dumps him before junior year, every time, no
matter how small, or how big, it feels like his heart is
breaking again inside his chest.
Henry is fourteen the ﬁrst time he steals a swig of his
father’s liquor, just to turn the volume down. He is sixteen
when he swipes two pills from his mother’s cabinet, just to
dull the ache. He is twenty when he gets so high that he
thinks he can see the cracks along his skin, the places
where he’s falling apart.
His heart has a draft.
It lets in light.
It lets in storms.
It lets in everything.

Time moves so fucking fast.
Blink, and you’re halfway through school, paralyzed by
the idea that whatever you choose to do, it means choosing
not to do a hundred other things, so you change your major
half a dozen times before ﬁnally ending up in theology, and
for a while it seems like the right path, but that’s really just
a reﬂex to the pride on your parents’ faces, because they
assume they’ve got a budding rabbi, but the truth is, you
have no desire to practice, you see the holy texts as stories,
sweeping epics, and the more you study, the less you
believe in any of it.
Blink, and you’re twenty-four, and you travel through
Europe, thinking—hoping—that the change will spark
something in you, that a glimpse of the greater, grander
world will bring your own into focus. And for a little while, it
does. But there’s no job, no future, only an interlude, and
when it’s over, your bank account is dry, and you’re not any
closer to anything.

307

Blink, and you’re twenty-six, and you’re called into the
dean’s oﬃce because he can tell that your heart’s not in it
anymore, and he advises you to ﬁnd another path, and he
assures you that you’ll ﬁnd your calling, but that’s the whole
problem, you’ve never felt called to any one thing. There is
no violent push in one direction, but a softer nudge a
hundred diﬀerent ways, and now all of them feel out of
reach.
Blink and you’re twenty-eight, and everyone else is now a
mile down the road, and you’re still trying to ﬁnd it, and the
irony is hardly lost on you that in wanting to live, to learn, to
ﬁnd yourself, you’ve gotten lost.

Blink, and you meet a girl.

The ﬁrst time Henry saw Tabitha Masters, she was dancing.
There must have been ten of them onstage. Henry was
there to see Robbie perform, but her limbs had a pull, her
form a kind of gravity. His gaze kept falling back toward her.
She was the kind of pretty that steals your breath, and the
kind you can’t really capture in a photo, because the magic
is in the movement. The way she moved, it was a story told
with nothing but a melody and a bend of her spine, an
outstretched hand, a slow descent to the darkened ﬂoor.
The ﬁrst time they met was at an after-party.
Onstage, her features were a mask, a canvas for other
people’s art. But there, in the crowded room, all Henry could
see was her smile. It took up her entire face, from her
pointed chin to the line of her hair, an all-consuming kind of
joy he couldn’t look away from. She was laughing at

308

something—he never found out what—and it was like
someone went and turned on all the lights in the room.
And there and then, his heart began to ache.
It took Henry thirty minutes and three drinks to work up
the nerve to say hello, but from that moment onward, it was
easy. The rhythm and ﬂow of frequencies in sync. And by
the end of the night, he was falling in love.
He’d fallen before.
Sophia in high school.
Robbie in college.
Sarah, Ethan, Jenna—but it was always hard, messy. Full
of starts and stops, wrong turns and dead ends. But with
Tabitha, it was easy.

Two years.
That’s how long they were together.
Two years of dinner, and breakfast, and ice cream in the
park, of dance rehearsals and rose bouquets, of sleeping
over at each other’s place, of weekend brunch and bingeing
TV shows, and trips upstate to meet his parents.
Two years of drinking less for her, and staying clean for
her, dressing up for her, and buying things he couldn’t
aﬀord, because he wanted to make her smile, wanted to
make her happy.
Two years, and not a single ﬁght, and now he thinks that
maybe that wasn’t such a good thing after all.
Two years—and somewhere between a question and an
answer, it fell apart.
Down on one knee with a ring in the middle of the park,
and Henry is such a fucking idiot, because she said no.
She said no, and that wasn’t even the worst word.
“You’re great,” she said. “You really are. But you’re not…”

309

And she doesn’t ﬁnish, and she doesn’t have to, because
he knows what comes next.
You’re not right.
You’re not enough.
“I thought you wanted to get married.”
“I do. One day.”
The words, crystal clear, despite never being said.
But not to you.
And then she walked away, and now Henry is here at the
bar and he’s drunk, but not nearly drunk enough.
He knows, because the world is still there, because the
entire night still feels too real, because everything still
hurts. He’s slumped forward, chin resting on his folded
arms, staring through the collection of empty bottles on the
table. He looks back from half a dozen warped reﬂections.
The Merchant is packed with bodies, a wall of white noise,
so Robbie has to shout over the din.
“Fuck her.”
And for some reason, coming from his ex-boyfriend, it
doesn’t make Henry feel much better. “I’m ﬁne,” he says, in
that automatic way people always answer when you ask
them how they are, even though his heart is hanging open
on its hinges.
“It’s for the best,” adds Bea, and if anyone else had said
it, she would have banished them to the corner of the bar
for being trite. Ten-minute time-out for platitudes. But it’s all
anyone has for him tonight.
Henry ﬁnishes the glass in front of him and reaches for
another.
“Slow down, kiddo,” says Bea, rubbing his neck.
“I’m ﬁne,” he says again.
And they both know him well enough to know it is a lie.
They know about his broken heart. They’ve both coaxed him
through his storms. They are the best people in his life, the

310

ones who hold him together, or at least, who keep him from
falling apart. But right now, there are too many cracks. Right
now, there is a chasm between their words and his ears,
their hands and his skin.
They are right there, but they feel so far away.
He looks up, studying their expressions, all pity, no
surprise, and a realization settles over him like a chill.
“You knew she’d say no.”
The silence lasts a beat too long. Bea and Robbie share a
glance, as if trying to decide who will take the lead, and
then Robbie reaches across for his hand. “Henry—”
He wrenches back. “You knew.”
He is on his feet now, nearly stumbling into the table
behind him.
Bea’s face crumples. “Come on. Sit back down.”
“No. No. No.”
“Hey,” says Robbie, steadying him. “I’ll walk you home.”
But Henry hates the way Robbie is looking at him, so he
shakes his head, even though it makes the room blur.
“No,” he says. “I just want to be alone.”
The biggest lie he’s ever told.
But Robbie’s hand falls away, and Bea shakes her head at
him, and they both let Henry go.

Henry is not drunk enough.
He goes into a liquor store and buys a bottle of vodka
from a guy who looks at him like he’s already had enough,
but also like he clearly needs it. Twists the cap oﬀ with his
teeth as it begins to rain.
His phone buzzes in his pocket.
Bea, probably. Or Robbie. Nobody else would call.
He lets it ring, holds his breath until it stops. He tells
himself that if they call again, he’ll answer. If they call again,
311

he’ll tell them he is not okay. But the phone doesn’t ring a
second time.
He doesn’t blame them for that, not now, not after. He
knows he’s not an easy friend, knows he should have seen it
coming, should have—
The bottle slips through his ﬁngers, shatters on the
sidewalk, and he should leave it there, but he doesn’t. He
reaches to pick it up, but he loses his balance. His hand
comes down on broken glass as he pushes himself back up.
It hurts, of course it hurts, but the pain is dampened a
little by the vodka, by the well of grief, by his ruined heart,
by everything else.
Henry fumbles for the kerchief in his pocket, the white silk
stitched with a silver T. He hadn’t wanted a box—that
classic, impersonal casing that always gave away the
question—but now, as he tugs the kerchief out, the ring
tumbles free, goes bouncing down the damp sidewalk.
The words echo in his head.
You’re great, Henry. You really are. But you’re not—
He presses the kerchief to his injured hand. In seconds,
the silk is stained red. Ruined.
You’re not enough.
Hands are like heads; they always bleed too much.
His brother, David, was the one who told him that. David,
the doctor, who’s known what he wanted to be since he was
ten years old.
Easy to stay on the path when the road is straight and the
steps are numbered.
Henry watches the kerchief turn red, stares down at the
diamond in the street and thinks of leaving it, but he can’t
aﬀord to, so he forces himself to bend over and pick it up.

312

Take a drink every time you hear you’re not
enough.
Not the right ﬁt.
Not the right look.
Not the right focus.
Not the right drive.
Not the right time.
Not the right job.
Not the right path.
Not the right future.
Not the right present.
Not the right you.
Not you.
(Not me?)
There’s just something missing.
(Missing…)
From us.
What could I have done?
Nothing. It’s just …
(Who you are.)
I didn’t think we were serious.
(You’re just too …
… sweet.
… soft.
… sensitive.)
I just don’t see us ending up together.
I met someone.
I’m sorry.
It’s not you.
Swallow it down.
We’re not on the same page.
We’re not in the same place.
It’s not you.
We can’t help who we fall in love with.

313

(And who we don’t.)
You’re such a good friend.
You’re going to make the right girl happy.
You deserve better.
Let’s stay friends.
I don’t want to lose you.
It’s not you.
I’m sorry.

314

II
And now he knows he’s had too much to drink.
He was trying to reach the place where he wouldn’t feel,
but he thinks he might have passed it, wandered
somewhere worse. His head spins, the sensation long past
pleasant. He ﬁnds a couple pills in his back pocket, slipped
there by his sister Muriel on her last visit. Little pink
umbrellas, she told him. He swallows them dry as the drizzle
turns to a downpour.
Water drips into his hair, streaking his glasses and
soaking through his shirt.
He does not care.
Maybe the rain will rinse him clean.
Maybe it will wash him away.
Henry reaches his building, but can’t bring himself to
climb the six steps to the door, the twenty-four more to his
apartment, that belongs to a past where he had a future, so
he sinks onto the stoop, leans back, and looks up at the
place where the rooftop meets the sky, and wonders how
many steps it takes to reach the edge. Forces himself to
stop, press his palms against his eyes, and tell himself it is
just a storm.
Batten down the hatches, and wait it out.
It is just a storm.
It is just a storm.

315

It’s just …
He is not sure when the man sits down beside him on the
step.
One second, Henry is alone, and the next, he is not.
He hears the snap of a lighter, a small ﬂame dancing at
the edge of his sight. Then a voice. For just a second, it
seems to come from everywhere, and then from right beside
him.
“Bad night.” A question without the question mark.
Henry looks over and sees a man, dressed in a slick
charcoal suit beneath an open black trench, and for a
horrible second, he thinks it’s his brother, David. Here to
remind Henry of all the ways he’s a disappointment.
They have the same black hair, the same sharp jaw, but
David doesn’t smoke, wouldn’t be caught dead in this part
of Brooklyn, isn’t half as handsome. The longer Henry stares
at the stranger, the more resemblance fades—replaced by
the awareness that the man isn’t getting wet.
Even though the rain is still falling hard, still soaking
through Henry’s wool jacket, his cotton shirt, pressing cold
hands against his skin. The stranger in the elegant suit
makes no eﬀort to shield the small ﬂame of his lighter, or
the cigarette itself. He takes a long drag and leans his
elbows back against the soaking steps, and tips his chin up,
as if welcoming the rain.
It never touches him.
It falls all around him, but he stays dry.
Henry thinks, then, that the man is a ghost. Or a wizard.
Or, most likely, a hallucination.
“What do you want?” asks the stranger, still studying the
sky, and Henry cringes, on instinct, but there’s no anger in
the man’s voice. If anything, it’s curious, questing. His head
drifts back down, and he looks at Henry with the greenest
eyes he’s ever seen. So bright they glitter in the dark.

316

“Right now, in this moment,” says the stranger. “What do
you want?”
“To be happy,” answers Henry.
“Ah,” says the stranger, smoke sliding between his lips,
“no one can give you that.”
Not you.
Henry has no idea who this man is, or if he’s even real,
and he knows, even through the fog of drink and drug, that
he should get up, and go inside. But he can’t will his legs to
move, the world is too heavy, and the words keep coming
now, spilling out of him.
“I don’t know what they want from me,” he says. “I don’t
know who they want me to be. They tell you to be yourself,
but they don’t mean it, and I’m just tired…” His voice
breaks. “I’m tired of falling short. Tired of being … it’s not
that I’m alone. I don’t mind alone. But this—” His ﬁngers
knot in his shirtfront. “It hurts.”
A hand rises beneath his chin.
“Look at me, Henry,” says the stranger, who never asked
his name.
Henry looks up, meets those luminous eyes. Sees
something curl in them, like smoke. The stranger is
beautiful, in a wolﬁsh way. Hungry and sharp. That emerald
gaze slides over him.
“You’re perfect,” the man murmurs, stroking a thumb
along Henry’s cheek.
His voice is silk, and Henry leans into it, into the touch,
nearly loses his balance when the man’s hand falls away.
“Pain can be beautiful,” he says, exhaling a cloud of
smoke. “It can transform. It can create.”
“But I don’t want to be in pain,” says Henry hoarsely. “I
want—”
“You want to be loved.”
A small, empty sound, half cough, half sob. “Yes.”

317

“Then be loved.”
“You make it sound simple.”
“It is,” says the stranger. “If you’re willing to pay.”
Henry chokes out a laugh. “I’m not looking for that kind of
love.”
The dark ﬂicker of a smile plays across the stranger’s
face. “And I’m not talking about money.”
“What else is there?”
The stranger reaches out and rests his hand against
Henry’s sternum.
“The one thing every human has to give.”
For an instant, Henry thinks the stranger wants his heart,
as broken as it is—and then he understands. He works at a
bookstore, has read enough epics, devoured the allegories
and myths. Hell, Henry spent the ﬁrst two-thirds of his life
studying scripture, and he grew up on a steady diet of
Blake, Milton, and Faust. But it has been a long time since
any of them felt like more than stories.
“Who are you?” he asks.
“I am the one who sees kindling and coaxes it to ﬂame.
The nurturer of all human potential.”
He stares at the stranger, still dry despite the storm, a
devil’s beauty in a familiar face, and those eyes, suddenly
more serpentine, and Henry knows this for what it is: a
waking dream. He’s had them once or twice before, a
consequence of aggressive self-medication.
“I don’t believe in devils,” he says, rising to his feet. “And
I don’t believe in souls.”
The stranger cranes his head. “Then you have nothing to
lose.”
The bone-deep sadness, kept at bay the last few minutes
by the stranger’s easy company, now rushes back. Pressure
against cracking glass. He sways a little, but the stranger
steadies him.

318

Henry doesn’t remember seeing the other man stand, but
now they’re eye to eye. And when the devil speaks again,
there’s a new depth to his voice, a steady warmth, like a
blanket drawn around his shoulders. Henry feels himself
lean into it.
“You want to be loved,” says the stranger, “by all of them.
You want to be enough for all of them. And I can give that to
you, for the price of something you won’t even miss.” The
stranger holds out his hand. “Well, Henry? What do you
say?”
And he doesn’t think any of this is real.
So it doesn’t matter.
Or perhaps the man in the rain is right.
He just has nothing left to lose.
In the end, it’s easy.
As easy as stepping oﬀ the edge.
And falling.
Henry takes his hand, and the stranger squeezes, hard
enough to reopen the cuts along his palm. But at last, he
doesn’t feel it. He doesn’t feel anything, as the darkness
smiles, and says a single word.
“Deal.”

319

New York City
March 17, 2014

III
There are a hundred kinds of silence.
There’s the thick silence of places long sealed shut, and
the muﬄed silence of ears stoppered up. The empty silence
of the dead, and the heavy silence of the dying.
There is the hollow silence of a man who has stopped
praying, and the airy silence of an empty synagogue, and
the held-breath silence of someone hiding from themselves.
There is the awkward silence that ﬁlls the space between
people who don’t know what to say. And the taut silence
that falls over those who do, but don’t know where or how
to start.
Henry doesn’t know what kind of silence this is, but it is
killing him.
He began to talk outside the corner shop, and kept talking
as they walked, because it was easier for him to speak when
he had somewhere to look besides her face. The words
spilled out of him as they reached the blue door of his
building, as they climbed the stairs, as they moved through
the apartment, and now the truth ﬁlls the air between them,
heavy as smoke, and Addie isn’t saying anything.
She sits on the sofa, her chin in her hand.
Outside the window, the day just carries on as if nothing’s
changed, but it feels like everything has, because Addie
LaRue is immortal, and Henry Strauss is damned.

320

“Addie,” he says, when he cannot stand it anymore.
“Please say something.”
And she looks up at him, eyes shining, not with some
spell, but tears, and he does not know at ﬁrst if she is
heartbroken or happy.
“I couldn’t understand,” she says. “No one has ever
remembered. I thought it was an accident. I thought it was a
trap. But you’re not an accident, Henry. You’re not a trap.
You remember me because you made a deal.” She shakes
her head. “Three hundred years spent trying to break this
curse, and Luc did the one thing I never expected.” She
wipes the tears away, and breaks into a smile.
“He made a mistake.”
There is such triumph in her eyes. But Henry doesn’t
understand.
“So our deals cancel out? Is that why we’re immune to
them?”
Addie shakes her head. “I’m not immune, Henry.”
He cringes back, as if struck. “But my deal doesn’t work
on you.”
Addie softens, takes his hand. “Of course it does. Your
deal and mine, they nest like Russian dolls together in a
shell. I look at you, and I see exactly what I want. It’s just
that what I want has nothing to do with looks, or charm, or
success. It would sound awful, in another life, but what I
want most—what I need—has nothing to do with you at all.
What I want, what I’ve always truly wanted, is for someone
to remember me. That’s why you can say my name. That’s
why you can go away, and come back, and still know who I
am. And that’s why I can look at you, and see you as you
are. And it is enough. It will always be enough.”
Enough. The word unravels between them, opening at his
throat. It lets in so much air.
Enough.

321

He sinks onto the couch beside her. Her hand slides
through his, their ﬁngers knotting.
“You said you were born in 1691,” he muses. “That makes
you…”
“Three hundred and twenty-three,” she says.
Henry whistles. “I’ve never been with an older woman.”
Addie laughs. “You do look very, very good for your age.”
“Why thank you.”
“Tell me about it,” he says.
“About what?”
“I don’t know. Everything. Three hundred years is such a
long time. You were there for wars and revolutions. You saw
trains and cars and planes and televisions. You witnessed
history as it was happening.”
Addie frowns. “I guess so,” she says, “but I don’t know;
history is something you look back on, not something you
really feel at the time. In the moment, you’re just … living. I
didn’t want to live forever. I just wanted to live.”
She curls into him, and they lie, heads together on the
couch, intertwined like lovers in a fable, and a new silence
settles over them, light as a summer sheet.
And then she says, “How long?”
His head rolls toward her. “What?”
“When you made your deal,” she says, voice careful and
light, a foot testing icy ground. “How long did you make it
for?”
Henry hesitates, and looks up at the ceiling instead of her.
“A lifetime,” he says, and it is not a lie, but a shadow
crosses Addie’s face.
“And he agreed?”
Henry nods, and pulls her back against him, exhausted by
everything he’s said, and everything he hasn’t.
“A lifetime,” she whispers.
The words hang between them in the dark.

322

New York City
March 18, 2014

IV
Addie is so many things, thinks Henry. But she is not
forgettable.
How could anyone forget this girl, when she takes up so
much space? She ﬁlls the room with stories, with laughter,
with warmth and light.
He has put her to work, or rather, she has put herself to
work, restocking and reshelving while he helps customers.
She has called herself a ghost, and she may be one to
other people, but Henry cannot look anywhere but at her.
She moves among the books as if they’re friends. And
perhaps, in a way, they are. They are, he supposes, a part of
her story, another thing she’s touched. Here, she says, is a
writer she once met, and here is an idea she had, here a
book that she read when it ﬁrst came out. Now and then,
Henry glimpses sadness, glimpses longing, but they are only
ﬂashes, and then she redoubles, brightens, launching into
another story.
“Did you know Hemingway?” he asks.
“We met, once or twice,” she says, with a smile, “but
Colette was cleverer.”
Book trails Addie like a shadow. He has never seen the cat
so invested in another human, and when he asks, she draws
a handful of treats from her pocket with a sheepish grin.

323

Their eyes meet now across the store, and he knows she
said she’s not immune, that their deals simply work
together, but the fact remains that there is no shimmer in
those brown eyes. Her gaze is clear. A lighthouse through
the fog.
She smiles, and Henry’s world goes brighter. She turns
away, and it is dark again.
A woman approaches the checkout desk, and Henry drags
himself back.
“Find everything you need?” Her eyes are already milky
with shine.
“Oh yes,” the woman says with a warm smile, and he
wonders what she sees instead of Henry. Is he a son, or a
lover, a brother, a friend?
Addie leans her elbows on the counter.
She taps the book he’s been turning through between
customers. A collection of modern candids in New York.
“I noticed the cameras at your place,” she says. “And the
photographs. They’re yours, aren’t they?”
Henry nods, resists the urge to say It’s just a hobby, or
rather, It was a hobby, once.
“You’re very good,” she says, which is nice, especially
coming from her. And he’s ﬁne, he knows; maybe even a
little better than ﬁne, sometimes.
He took headshots for Robbie back in college, but that
was because Robbie couldn’t aﬀord a real photographer.
Muriel called his photos cute. Subversive in their
conventional way.
But Henry wasn’t trying to subvert anything. He just
wanted to capture something.
He looks down at the book.
“There’s this family photo,” he says, “not the one in the
hall, this other one, from back when I was six or seven. That
day was awful. Muriel put gum in David’s book and I had a

324

cold, and my parents were ﬁghting right up until the ﬂash
went oﬀ. And in the photo, we all look so … happy. I
remember seeing that picture and realizing that
photographs weren’t real. There’s no context, just the
illusion that you’re showing a snapshot of a life, but life isn’t
snapshots, it’s ﬂuid. So photos are like ﬁctions. I loved that
about them. Everyone thinks photography is truth, but it’s
just a very convincing lie.”
“Why did you stop?”
Because time doesn’t work like photos.
Click, and it stays still.
Blink, and it leaps forward.
He always thought of taking photos as a hobby, an art
class credit, and by the time he ﬁgured out that it was
something you could do, it was too late. Or at least, it felt
that way.
He was too many miles behind.
So he gave up. Put the cameras on the shelf with the rest
of the abandoned hobbies. But something about Addie
makes him want to pick one up again.
He doesn’t have a camera with him, of course, only his
cell phone, but these days, that is good enough. He lifts it
up, framing Addie at rest, the bookshelves rising at her
back.
“It won’t work,” she says, right as Henry takes the
picture. Or tries. He taps the screen, but there’s no click, no
capture. He tries again, and this time the phone takes the
photo, but it is a blur.
“I told you,” she says softly.
“I don’t get it,” he says. “It was so long ago. How could he
have predicted ﬁlm, or phones?”
Addie manages a sad smile. “It’s not the technology he
tampered with. It’s me.”
Henry pictures the stranger, smiling in the dark.

325

He sets the phone down.

326

New York City
September 5, 2013

V
Henry wakes to the blare of morning traﬃc.
He winces at the sound of car horns, the sunlight
streaming through the window. He reaches for the memories
of last night, and for a second, comes up with nothing, a ﬂat
black slate, a cottony silence. But when he squeezes his
eyes shut, the darkness cracks, gives way to a wave of pain
and sadness, a medley of broken bottles and heavy rain,
and a stranger in a black suit, a conversation that must
have been a dream.
Henry knows that Tabitha said no—that part was real, the
memory too stinging to be anything but true. That is, after
all, why he started drinking. The drinking is what led him
home through the rain, to rest on the stoop before going
inside, and that is where the stranger—but no, that part
didn’t happen.
The stranger and their conversation, that was the stuﬀ of
stories, a clear subconscious commentary, his demons
played out in mental desperation.
A headache thuds dully in Henry’s skull, and he scrubs at
his eyes with the back of one hand. A metal weight knocks
against his cheek. He squints up and sees a dark leather
band around his wrist. An elegant analog watch, with gold
numerals set against an onyx ground. On its face, a single
golden hand rests the barest fraction oﬀ of midnight.

327

Henry has never worn a watch.
The sight of it, heavy and unfamiliar on his wrist, reminds
Henry of a shackle. He sits up, clawing at the clasp,
consumed by the sudden fear that it is bound to him, that it
won’t come oﬀ—but at the slightest pressure, the clasp
comes free, and the watch tumbles onto the twisted duvet.
It lands facedown, and there, on the reverse, Henry sees
two words etched in hairline script.
Live well.
He scrambles out of the bed, away from the watch, stares
at the timepiece as if expecting it to attack. But it just lies
there, silent. His heart knocks inside his chest, so loud he
can hear it, and he is back in the dark, rain dripping through
his hair as the stranger smiles and holds out his hand.
Deal.
But that didn’t happen.
Henry looks at his palm and sees the shallow cuts,
crusted over with blood. Notices the drops of brownish red
dotting the sheets. The broken bottle. That was real, then,
too. But the devil’s hand in his, that was a fever dream. Pain
can do that, creep from waking hours into sleep. Once,
when he was nine or ten, Henry had strep throat, the pain
so bad that every time he drifted oﬀ to sleep, he dreamed of
swallowing hot coals, of being trapped in burning buildings,
the smoke clawing down his throat. The mind, trying to
make sense of suﬀering.
But the watch—
Henry can hear a low, rhythmic knocking as he holds it to
his ear. It doesn’t make any other sound (one night, soon,
he will take the thing apart, and ﬁnd the body empty of
cogs, empty of anything to explain the creeping forward
motion).
And yet, it is solid, heavy even, in his hand. It feels real.

328

The knocking gets louder, and then he realizes it’s not
coming from the watch at all. It’s just the solid thud of
knuckles on wood, someone at his door. Henry holds his
breath, waits to see if it will stop, but it doesn’t. He backs
away from the watch, the bed, grabs a clean shirt from the
back of a chair.
“I’m coming,” he mutters, dragging it over his head. The
collar snags on his glasses, and he catches his shoulder on
the doorframe, swearing softly, hoping all the way from the
bedroom to the front door that the person beyond will give
up, go away. They don’t, so Henry opens the door, expecting
to see Bea or Robbie or maybe Helen down the hall, looking
again for her cat.
But it’s his sister, Muriel.
Muriel, who has been to Henry’s place exactly twice in the
last ﬁve years. And once it was because she had too much
herbal tea at a lunch meeting and couldn’t make it back to
Chelsea.
“What are you doing here?” he asks, but she is already
brushing past him, unwinding a scarf that’s more decorative
than functional.
“Does family need a reason?”
The question is clearly rhetorical.
She turns, her eyes sweeping over him, the way he
imagines they sweep over exhibits, and he waits for her
usual assessment, some variation of you look like shit.
Instead his sister says, “You’re looking good,” which is
strange, because Muriel has never been one to lie (she
“doesn’t like to encourage fallacy in a world rife with empty
speech”) and a passing glance in the hall mirror is enough
to conﬁrm that Henry does, in fact, look almost as rough as
he feels.
“Beatrice texted me last night when you didn’t answer
your phone,” she continues. “She told me about Tabitha,

329

and the whole no-go. I’m sorry, Hen.” Muriel hugs him, and
Henry doesn’t know where to put his hands. They end up
hovering in the air around her shoulders until she lets go.
“What happened? Was she cheating?” And Henry wishes
the answer were yes, because the truth is worse, the truth is
that he simply wasn’t interesting enough. “It doesn’t
matter,” continues Muriel. “Fuck her, you deserve better.”
He almost laughs, because he can’t count how many
times Muriel pointed out that Tabitha was out of his league.
She glances around at the apartment.
“Did you redecorate? It’s really cozy in here.”
Henry surveys the living room, dotted with candles and
art and other remnants of Tabitha. The clutter is his. The
style was hers. “No.”
His sister is still standing. Muriel never sits, never settles,
never even perches.
“Well, I can see you’re ﬁne,” she says, “but next time,
answer your phone. Oh,” she adds, taking her scarf back,
already halfway to the door. “Happy New Year.”
It takes him a moment to remember.
Rosh Hashanah.
Muriel sees the confusion on his face and grins. “You
would have made such a bad rabbi.”
He doesn’t disagree. Henry would normally go home—
they both would—but David couldn’t get away from his
hospital shift this year, so their parents had made other
plans.
“Are you going to temple?” he asks now.
“No,” says Muriel. “But there’s a show uptown tonight, a
kinky burlesque hybrid, and I’m pretty sure there’s going to
be some ﬁre play. I’ll light a candle on someone.”
“Mom and Dad would be so proud,” he says dryly, but in
truth, he suspects they would. Muriel Strauss can do no
wrong.

330

She shrugs. “We all celebrate in our own way.” She twists
the scarf back into place with a ﬂourish. “I’ll see you for Yom
Kippur.”
Muriel reaches for the door, then turns back toward him,
and stretches up to ruﬄe Henry’s hair. “My little storm
cloud,” she says. “Don’t let it get too dark in there.”
And then she’s gone, and Henry sags back against the
door, dazed, tired, and thoroughly confused.

Henry has heard that grief has stages.
He wonders if the same is true for love.
If it’s normal to feel lost, and angry, and sad, hollow and
somehow, horribly, relieved. Maybe it’s the thud of the
hangover muddling all the things he should be feeling,
churning them into what he does.
He stops at Roast, the bustling coﬀee shop a block shy of
the store. It has good muﬃns, halfway decent drinks, and
terrible service, which is pretty much par for the course in
this part of Brooklyn, and sees Vanessa working at the till.
New York is full of beautiful people, actors and models
moonlighting as bartenders and baristas, making drinks to
cover rent until their ﬁrst big break. He’s always assumed
Vanessa is one of those, a waiﬁsh blonde with a small
inﬁnity symbol tattooed inside one wrist. He also assumes
her name is Vanessa—that’s the name on the tag pinned to
her apron—but she’s never actually told him. Has never said
anything to him, for that matter, besides, “What can I get
you?”
Henry will stand at the counter, and she will ask his order
and his name (even though he has been coming here six
days a week for the last three years, and she’s been there
for two of them), and from the time she punches in his ﬂat
white to the time she writes his name on the cup and calls
331

out for the next order, she will never look at him. Her gaze
will ﬂit from his shirt to the computer to his chin, and Henry
will feel like he isn’t even there.
That’s how it always goes.
Only, today, it doesn’t.
Today, when she takes his order, she looks up.
It’s such a small change, the diﬀerence of two inches,
maybe three, but now he can see her eyes, which are a
startling blue, and the barista looks at him, not his chin. She
holds his gaze, and smiles.
“Hi there,” she says, “what can I get you?”
He orders a ﬂat white, and says his name, and that is
where it ends.
Then it doesn’t.
“Fun day planned?” she asks, making small talk as she
writes his name on the cup.
Vanessa has never made small talk with him before.
“Just work,” he says, and her attention ﬂicks back to his
face. This time he catches a faint shimmer—a wrongness—
in her eyes. It’s a trick of the light, it must be, but for a
second, it looks like frost, or fog.
“What do you do?” she asks, sounding genuinely
interested, and he tells her about The Last Word, and her
eyes light up a little. She has always been a reader, and she
cannot think of anywhere better than a bookstore. When he
pays for the order, their ﬁngers brush, and she cuts him
another glance. “See you tomorrow, Henry.”
The barista says his name like she stole it, mischief
tugging at her smile.
And he can’t tell if she’s ﬂirting until he gets his drink,
and sees the little black arrow she’s drawn, pointing to the
bottom, and when he tips it up to see, his heart gives a little
thud like an engine turning over.

332

She’s written her name and number on the bottom of the
cup.

At The Last Word, Henry unlocks the grate, and the door,
while ﬁnishing his coﬀee. He turns the sign and goes
through the motions of feeding Book and opening the store
and shelving new stock until the bell chimes, announcing his
ﬁrst customer.
Henry winds through the stacks to ﬁnd an older woman,
toddling between the aisles, from HISTORICAL to MYSTERY to
ROMANCE and back again. He gives her a few minutes, but
when she makes the loop a third time, he steps in.
“Can I help you?”
“I don’t know, I don’t know,” she murmurs, half to herself,
but then she turns to look at him, and something changes in
her face. “I mean, yes, please, I hope so.” There’s the
faintest shine to her eyes, a rheumy glow, as she explains
that she’s looking for a book she’s already read.
“These days, I can’t remember what I’ve read, and what I
haven’t,” she explains, shaking her head. “Everything
sounds familiar. All the covers look the same. Why do they
do that? Why do they make everything like everything
else?”
Henry assumes it has to do with marketing and trends,
but he knows that’s probably not helpful to say. Instead he
asks if she remembers anything about it.
“Oh, let’s see. It was a big book. It was about life and
death, and history.”
That doesn’t exactly narrow it down, but Henry is used to
the lack of details. The number of people who’ve come in,
looking for something they’ve seen, able to supply nothing
beyond “The cover was red,” or “I think it had the word girl
in the title.”
333

“It was sad, and lovely,” explains the old woman. “I’m
sure it was set in England. Oh dear. My mind. I think it had a
rose on the cover.”
She looks around at the shelves, wrings her papery hands
together. And she’s clearly not going to decide, so he does.
Desperately uncomfortable, he tugs a thick historical from
the nearest ﬁction shelf.
“Was it this?” he asks, oﬀering Wolf Hall. But he knows
the moment it’s in his hand that it’s not the one. There’s a
poppy on the cover, not a rose, and there’s nothing
particularly sad or lovely about the life of Thomas Cromwell,
even if the writing is beautiful, poignant. “Never mind,” he
says, already reaching to put it back when the old woman’s
face lights up with pleasure.
“That’s it!” She grabs his arm with bony ﬁngers. “That’s
exactly what I was looking for.” Henry has a hard time
believing it, but the woman’s joy is so clear that he begins
to doubt himself.
He is about to ring her up when he remembers. Atkinson.
Life After Life. A book about life and death and history, sad
and lovely, set in England, with a twinned rose on the cover.
“Wait,” he says, ducking around the corner and down the
recent ﬁction aisle to retrieve the book.
“Is this it?”
The woman’s face brightens, exactly as it did before.
“Yes! You clever thing, that’s just the one,” she says, with
the same conviction.
“Happy I could help,” he says, unsure if he did.
She decides to take both books, says she’s sure that she
will love them.
The rest of the morning is just as strange.
A middle-aged man comes in searching for a thriller, and
leaves with all ﬁve titles that Henry recommends. A college
student comes looking for a book on Japanese mythology,

334

and when Henry apologizes for not having it, she practically
trips over herself to say it’s not his fault, and insists on
letting him order it in for her, even though she isn’t sure
about the class. A guy with a model’s build and a jaw
sharper than a penknife comes to peruse their fantasy
section, and he writes his e-mail on the receipt beneath his
signature when he pays.
Henry feels oﬀ-balance, the way he did when Muriel told
him he looked good. It’s like déjà vu, and not like déjà vu at
all, because the feeling is entirely new. It’s like April Fool’s,
when the rules change, and everything’s a game, and
everyone else is in on it, and he’s still marveling over the
last encounter, face a little ﬂushed, when Robbie bursts in
through the door, chime ringing in his wake.
“Oh my god,” he says, throwing his arms around Henry,
and for a moment, he thinks something awful must have
happened, before realizing that it already happened to him.
“It’s okay,” says Henry, and of course it’s not, but today
has been so weird that everything before it feels a little like
a dream. Or maybe this is the dream? If it is, he’s not all
that eager to wake up. “It’s okay,” he says again.
“It doesn’t have to be okay,” says Robbie. “I just want you
to know I’m here, I would have been there last night, too—I
wanted to come over when you didn’t answer your phone,
but Bea said we should give you space, and I don’t know
why I listened, I’m sorry.”
It comes out in a single stream of words.
Robbie’s grip tightens as he talks, and Henry savors the
embrace. They ﬁt together with the familiar comfort of a
well-worn coat. The hug lingers a little too long. Henry clears
his throat and pulls back, and Robbie gives an awkward
laugh and turns away, his face catching the light, and Henry
notices a ﬁne streak of purple along Robbie’s temple, right
where it meets his sandy hairline.

335

“You’re glittering.”
Robbie scrubs halfheartedly at the makeup. “Oh,
rehearsal.”
There’s an odd shine in Robbie’s eyes, a glassiness Henry
knows too well, and he wonders if Robbie’s on something, or
if it’s simply been awhile since he slept. Back in college,
Robbie would get so high on drugs or dreams or big ideas
that he’d have to burn all the energy out of his system, and
then he’d crash.
The door chimes.
“Son of a bitch,” announces Bea, slamming her satchel
down on the counter. “Ostrich-minded motherfucker.”
“Customers,” warns Henry, even though the only one
currently nearby is a deaf older man, a regular named
Michael who frequents the horror section.
“To what do we owe this tantrum?” asks Robbie cheerfully.
Drama always puts him in a good mood.
“My asshole adviser,” she says, storming past them
toward the art and art history section. They share a look,
and trail after her.
“He didn’t like the proposal?” asks Henry.
Bea has been trying to get a dissertation topic approved
for the better part of a year.
“He turned it down!” She whips down an aisle, nearly
toppling a pile of magazines. Henry follows behind her,
doing his best to right the destruction in her wake.
“He said it was too esoteric. As if he’d know the meaning
of the word if it blew him.”
“Use it in a sentence?” asks Robbie, but she ignores him,
reaching up to pull down a book.
“That closed-minded—”
And another.
“—stale-brained—”
And another.

336

“—corpse.”
“This isn’t a library,” says Henry as she carries the pile to
the low leather chair in the corner and slumps into it,
startling the orange lump of fur from between a pair of worn
pillows.
“Sorry, Book,” she mutters, lifting the cat gingerly onto
the back of the old chair, where he does his best impression
of an inconvenienced bread loaf. Bea continues to emit a
low stream of curses as she turns the pages.
“I know just what we need,” says Robbie, turning toward
the storeroom. “Doesn’t Meredith keep a stash of whisky in
the back?”
And even though it’s only 3 P.M., Henry doesn’t protest. He
sinks onto the ﬂoor, sits with his back to the nearest shelf,
legs stretched long, feeling suddenly, unbearably tired.
Bea looks up at him, sighs. “I’m sorry,” she starts, but
Henry waves her away.
“Please, continue trashing your advisor and my art history
section. Someone has to behave normally.”
But she closes the book, adds it back to the pile, and joins
Henry on the ﬂoor.
“Can I tell you something?” Her voice goes up at the end,
but he knows it’s not a question. “I’m glad you broke it oﬀ
with Tabitha.”
A lance of pain, like the cut across his palm. “She broke it
oﬀ with me.”
Bea waves her hand as if that small detail doesn’t matter.
“You deserve someone who loves you as you are. The good
and the bad and the maddening.”
You want to be loved. You want to be enough.
Henry swallows. “Yeah, well, being me hasn’t worked out
so well.”
Bea leans toward him. “But that’s the thing, Henry, you
haven’t been you. You waste so much time on people who

337

don’t deserve you. People who don’t know you, because you
don’t let them know you.” Bea cups his face, that strange
shimmer in her eyes. “Henry, you’re smart, and kind, and
infuriating. You hate olives and people who talk during
movies. You love milkshakes and people who can laugh until
they cry. You think it’s a crime to turn ahead to the end of a
book. When you’re angry you get quiet, and when you’re
sad you get loud, and you hum when you’re happy.”
“And?”
“And I haven’t heard you hum in years.” Her hands fall
away. “But I’ve seen you eat a shit ton of olives.”
Robbie comes back, holding the bottle and three mugs.
The Last Word’s only customer toddles out, and then Robbie
shuts the door behind him, turning the sign to CLOSED. He
comes and sits between Henry and Bea on the ﬂoor and
uncorks the bottle with his teeth.
“What are we drinking to?” asks Henry.
“To new beginnings,” says Robbie, eyes still shining as he
ﬁlls the cups.

338

New York City
March 18, 2014

VI
The bell chimes and Bea strides in.
“Robbie wants to know if you’re avoiding him,” she says,
in lieu of hello. Henry’s heart sinks. The answer is yes, of
course, and no. He cannot shake the look of hurt in Robbie’s
eyes, but it doesn’t excuse the way he acted, or maybe it
does.
“I’ll take that as a yes,” says Bea. “And where have you
been hiding?”
Henry wants to say, I saw you at the dinner party, but
wonders if she has forgotten the entire night, or just the
parts that Addie touched.
Speaking of. “Bea, this is Addie.”
Beatrice turns toward her, and for a second, and only a
second, Henry thinks that she remembers. It’s the way she’s
looking at Addie, as if she is a piece of art, but one that Bea
has encountered before. Despite everything, Henry expects
her to nod, to say, “Oh, good to see you again”—instead,
Bea smiles. She says, “You know, there’s something
timeless about your face,” and he’s rocked by the
strangeness of the echo, the force of the déjà vu.
But Addie only smiles, and says, “I’ve heard that before.”
As Bea continues to study Addie, Henry studies her.
She has always been ruthlessly polished, but today
there’s neon paint on her ﬁngers, a kiss of gold at her

339

temple, what looks like powdered sugar on her sleeve.
“What have you been doing?” he asks.
She looks down. “Oh, I was at the Artifact!” she says, as if
that’s supposed to mean something. Seeing his confusion,
she explains. The Artifact is, according to Beatrice, part
carnival and part art exhibit, an interactive medley of
installations on the High Line.
As Bea talks about mirrored chambers and glass domes
full of stars, sugar clouds, the plume from pillow ﬁghts, and
murals made of a thousand strangers’ notes, Addie
brightens, and Henry thinks it must be hard to surprise a girl
who’s lived three hundred years.
So when she turns to him, eyes bright, and says, “We
have to go,” there’s nothing he’d rather do. There is, of
course, the matter of the store, the fact he is the sole
employee, and there are still four hours until closing. But he
has an idea.
Henry grabs a bookmark, the store’s only piece of
merchandise, and begins writing on the back side. “Hey
Bea,” he says, pushing the makeshift card across the
counter. “Can you close up?”
“I have a life,” she says, but then she looks down at
Henry’s tight and slanting script.
The Library of The Last Word.
Bea smiles, and pockets the card.
“Have fun,” she says, waving them out.

340

New York City
September 5, 2013

VII
Sometimes Henry wishes he had a cat.
He supposes he could just adopt Book, but the tabby feels
indivisible from The Last Word, and he can’t shake the
superstitious belief that if he tried to extricate the ancient
cat from the secondhand shop, it would turn to dust before
he got it home.
Which is, he knows, a morbid way of thinking about
people and places, or in this case pets and places, but it’s
dusk, and he drank a little too much whisky, and Bea had to
go teach a class and Robbie had a friend’s show, so he’s
alone again, heading back to an empty apartment, wishing
he had a cat or something waiting for him to come home.
He tests out the phrase as he walks in.
“Hi, kitty, I’m home,” he says, before realizing that it
makes him a twenty-eight-year-old bachelor talking to an
imaginary pet, and that feels inﬁnitely worse.
He grabs a beer from the fridge, stares down at the bottle
opener, and realizes it belongs to Tabitha. A pink and green
thing in the shape of a lucha libre from a trip she took to
Mexico City last month. He tosses it aside, opens a kitchen
drawer looking for another, and ﬁnds a wooden spoon, a
dance company magnet, a handful of ridiculous bendy
straws, looks around, then, sees a dozen more things strewn
around the apartment, all of them hers. He digs up a box of

341

books and turns them out, begins ﬁlling it again with
photographs, notecards, paperbacks, a pair of ballet ﬂats, a
mug, a bracelet, a hairbrush, a photograph.
He ﬁnishes the ﬁrst beer, opens a second on the edge of
the counter, and keeps going, moving from room to room,
less a methodic procession than a lost wander. An hour
later, the box is only half-full, but Henry’s losing steam. He
doesn’t want to do this anymore, doesn’t even want to be
there, in an apartment that somehow feels both empty and
cluttered. There’s too much space to think. There’s not
enough to breathe.
Henry sits between the empty beer bottles and the halfﬁlled box for several minutes, knee bouncing, and then
surges to his feet, and goes out.

The Merchant is busy.
It always is—one of those neighborhood bars whose
success owes more to its sheer proximity than to the quality
of its drinks. A local institution. Most of the people who
frequent the Merchant refer to it simply as “the bar.”
Henry weaves through the crowd, grabs a stool at the
edge of the counter, hoping the ambient noise of the place
will make him feel a little less alone.
Mark’s on shift tonight, a ﬁfty-something with gray
sideburns and a catalog smile. It normally takes a good ten
minutes to ﬂag him down, but tonight, the bartender comes
straight to him, ignoring the queue. Henry orders tequila,
and Mark comes back with a bottle and a pair of shots.
“On the house,” he says, pouring himself a matching
glass.
Henry manages a wan smile. “Do I look that rough?”
But there’s no pity in Mark’s gaze, only a strange and
subtle light.
342

“You look great,” he says, just like Muriel, and it’s the ﬁrst
time he’s said more than a single line, his answers usually
limited to drink orders and nods.
Their glasses knock together, and Henry orders a second,
and a third. He knows he is drinking too much too fast,
piling liquor on top of the beers from home, the whisky he’d
poured at work.
A girl comes up to the bar, and glances at Henry.
She looks away, and then back again, as if seeing him for
the ﬁrst time. And there it is again, that shine, a ﬁlm of light
over her eyes as she leans in, and he can’t seem to catch
her name, but it doesn’t matter.
They do their best to talk over the noise, her hand resting
at ﬁrst on his forearm, then his shoulder, before sliding
through his hair.
“Come home with me,” she says, and he’s so caught by
the longing in her voice, the open want. But then her friends
come along and peel her away, their own eyes shining as
they say Sorry, say You’re such a good guy, say Have a
great night.
Henry slides oﬀ the stool and heads for the bathroom,
and this time, he can feel the ripple, the heads turning
toward him.
A guy catches his arm and says something about a
photography project, how he’d be a perfect ﬁt, before
sliding him his card.
Two women try to draw him into the circle of their
conversation.
“I wish I had a son like you,” says one.
“Son?” says the other with a raucous laugh as he twists
free, escapes down the hall and into the toilets.
Braces himself against the counter.
He has no idea what’s happening.

343

He thinks back to the coﬀee shop that morning, Vanessa’s
number on the bottom of the cup. To the customers in the
store, all so eager for his help. To Muriel, who told him he
looked well. To the pale fog, like candle smoke, in all of their
eyes.
He looks down at the watch on his wrist, glinting in the
bathroom light, and for the ﬁrst time, he’s certain that it’s
real.
That the man in the rain was real.
The deal was real.
“Hey.”
He looks up and sees a guy, glassy eyed and smiling at
Henry like they are the best of friends.
“You look like you could use a bump.”
He holds out a little glass jar, and Henry stares at the tiny
column of powder inside.
He was twelve the ﬁrst time he got high.
Someone handed him a joint behind the bleachers, and
the smoke burned his lungs, and he almost threw up, but
then everything went a little … soft. Weed made space in
his skull, eased the nervous terror in his heart. But he
couldn’t control the places it took his head. Valium and
Xanax were better, dulling everything at once, but he’s
always stayed away from the harder stuﬀ, out of fear—not
the fear that something would go wrong. Just the opposite:
the fear it would feel right. The fear of the slip, the slide, of
knowing he wouldn’t be strong enough to stop.
It’s never been the high he craved, anyway, not exactly.
It’s just the quiet.
That happy side eﬀect.
He tried to be better, for Tabitha.
But Tabitha’s gone, and it doesn’t matter, anyway.
Not anymore.
Now Henry just wants to feel good.

344

He taps the powder onto his thumb, has no idea if he’s
doing it right, but he inhales, and it hits like a sudden,
jolting cold, and then—the world opens. The details clear,
the colors brighten, and somehow everything gets sharp
and fuzzy at the same time.
Henry must have said something, because the guy
laughs. And then he reaches out, and wipes a ﬂeck from
Henry’s cheek, and the contact is like static shock, a spark
of energy where skin meets skin.
“You’re perfect,” says the stranger, ﬁngers drifting down
his jaw, and Henry ﬂushes with a dizzy heat that makes him
need to move.
“Sorry,” he says, backing out into the hall.
He slumps against the darkened wall, waits for the world
to steady.
“Hey.”
He looks up and sees a guy with his arm slung around a
girl’s shoulders, both of them long and lean and feline.
“What’s your name?” asks the guy.
“Henry.”
“Henry,” echoes the girl with a catlike smile.
She looks at him with such obvious desire, he actually
rocks back on his heels. No one has ever looked at him that
way. Not Tabitha. Not Robbie. No one—not on the ﬁrst date,
or in the middle of sex, or when he got down on one knee …
“I’m Lucia,” she says. “This is Benji. And we’ve been
looking for you.”
“What did I do?” he asks.
Her smile tilts. “Nothing yet.”
She bites her lip, and the guy looks at Henry, his face
slack with longing, and at ﬁrst he doesn’t realize what
they’re talking about.
And then he does.
Laughter rolls through him, a strange, unbridled thing.

345

He’s never been in a threesome, unless you count that
one time in school when he and Robbie and one of their
friends got incredibly drunk and he’s still not entirely sure
how far things went.
“Come with us,” she says, holding out her hand.
And a dozen excuses spill through his mind and then out
again as Henry follows them home.

346

New York City
September 7, 2013

VIII
God, it feels good to be wanted.
Everywhere he goes, he can feel the ripple, the attention
shifting toward him. Henry leans into the attention, the
smiles, the warmth, the light. For the ﬁrst time he truly
understands the concept of being drunk with power.
It’s like setting down a heavy weight long after your arms
have gotten tired. There’s this sudden, sweeping lightness,
like air in your chest, like sunlight after rain.
It feels good to be the user instead of the used.
To be the one who gets instead of the one who loses.
It feels good. It shouldn’t, he knows, but it does.
He stands in line at the Roast, desperately needing
coﬀee.
The last few days have been a blur, late nights giving way
to strange mornings, every moment fueled by the heady
pleasure of being wanted, of knowing that whatever they
see, it’s good, it’s great, it’s perfect.
He’s perfect.
And it’s not just the straightforward gravity of lust, not
always. People drift toward him now, every one of them
pulled into his orbit, but the why is always diﬀerent.
Sometimes it’s just simple desire, but other times it’s more
nuanced. Sometimes it’s an obvious need, and other times,
he can’t guess what they see when they look at him.

347

That’s the only unsettling part, really—their eyes. The fog
that winds through them, thickening to frost, to ice. A
constant reminder that this new life isn’t exactly normal,
isn’t entirely real.
But it’s enough.
“Next!”
He steps forward, and looks up, and sees Vanessa.
“Oh, hi,” he says.
“You didn’t call.”
But she doesn’t sound angry, or annoyed. If anything, she
sounds too bright, teasing, but it’s the kind of teasing used
to cover up embarrassment. He should know—he’s used
that tone a dozen times to hide his own hurt.
“I’m sorry,” he says, blushing. “I wasn’t sure if I should.”
Vanessa smiles slyly. “Was the whole name and number
thing too subtle?”
Henry laughs, and hands his cell across the counter. “Call
me,” he says, and she taps her number in, and hits Call.
“There,” says Henry, taking back the phone, “now I have no
excuse.”
He feels like an idiot, even as he says it, like a kid reciting
movie lines, but Vanessa only blushes, and bites her bottom
lip, and he wonders what would happen if he told her to go
out with him, right then, if she would take oﬀ her apron and
duck beneath the counter, but he doesn’t try it, just says,
“I’ll call.”
And she says, “You better.”
Henry smiles, turns to go. He’s almost to the door when
he hears his name.
“Mr. Strauss.”
Henry’s stomach drops. He knows the voice, can picture
the older man’s tweed jacket, his salt-and-pepper hair, the
look of disappointment on his face as he advised Henry to

348

step away from the department, the school, and try to ﬁgure
out where his passion was, because it clearly wasn’t there.
Henry tries to muster a smile, feels himself falling short.
“Dean Melrose,” he says, turning to face the man who
pushed him oﬀ the road.
And there he is, ﬂesh and bone and tweed. But instead of
the contempt Henry got so used to seeing, the dean looks
pleased. A smile splits his trim gray beard.
“What a lucky turn,” he says. “You’re just the man I
wanted to see.”
Henry has a hard time believing that, until he notices the
pale smoke twisting through the man’s eyes. And he knows
he should be polite, but what he wants to do is tell the dean
to go fuck himself, so he splits the diﬀerence and simply
asks, “Why?”
“There’s a position opening in the theology school, and I
think you’d be perfect for it.”
Henry almost laughs. “You’ve got to be kidding.”
“Not at all.”
“I never ﬁnished my PhD. You failed me.”
The dean holds up a ﬁnger. “I didn’t fail you.”
Henry bristles. “You threatened to, if I didn’t leave.”
“I know,” he says, looking genuinely sorry. “I was wrong.”
Three words he’s sure this man has never said. Henry
wants to savor them, but he can’t.
“No,” he says, “you were right. It wasn’t a good ﬁt. I
wasn’t happy there. And I have no desire to go back.”
It’s a lie. He misses the structure, misses the path, misses
the purpose. And maybe it wasn’t a perfect ﬁt, but nothing
is.
“Come in for an interview,” says Dean Melrose, holding
out his card. “Let me change your mind.”

349

“You’re late.”
Bea’s waiting on the bookstore steps.
“Sorry,” he says, unlocking the door. “Still not a library,”
he adds as she slaps a ﬁve-dollar bill on the counter and
disappears into the art section. She makes a noncommittal
uh-huh, and he can hear her pulling books from the shelves.
Bea is the only one who hasn’t changed, the only one who
doesn’t seem to treat him diﬀerently.
“Hey,” he says, following her down the aisle. “Do I look
strange to you?”
“No,” she says, scanning the shelves.
“Bea, look at me.”
She turns, gives him a long up-and-down appraisal.
“You mean besides the lipstick on your neck?”
Henry blushes, wiping at his skin. “Yeah,” he says,
“besides that.”
She shrugs. “Not really.”
But it’s there, in her eyes, that unmistakable shimmer, a
faint and iridescent ﬁlm that seems to spread as she studies
him. “Really? Nothing?”
She pulls a book from the shelf. “Henry, what do you want
me to say?” she asks, searching for a second. “You look like
you.”
“So you don’t…” He doesn’t know how to ask. “You don’t
want me, then?”
Bea turns, and looks at him for a long moment, and then
bursts out laughing.
“Sorry, hon,” she says when she catches her breath.
“Don’t get me wrong. You’re cute. But I’m still a lesbian.”
And the moment she says it, he feels absurd, and
absurdly relieved.
“What’s this about?” she asks.
I made a deal with the devil and now whenever anyone
looks at me, they see only what they want. He shakes his

350

head. “Nothing. Never mind.”
“Well,” she says, adding another book to her stack, “I
think I found a new thesis.”
She carries the books back up to the counter, and spreads
them out on top of the ledgers and receipts. Henry watches
her turn through the pages until she ﬁnds what she’s
looking for in each, then steps back, so he can see what
she’s found.
Three portraits, all of them renditions of a young woman,
though they clearly come from diﬀerent times and diﬀerent
schools. “What am I looking at?” he asks.
“I call her the ghost in the frame.”
One is a pencil sketch, the edges rough, unﬁnished. In it,
the woman lies on her stomach, tangled in sheets. Hair
pools around her, and her face is little more than panes of
shadow, a faint scattering of freckles across her cheeks. The
title of the piece is written in Italian.
Ho Portado le Stelle a Letto
The English translation sits beneath.
I Took the Stars to Bed.
The second piece is French, a more abstract portrait, done
in the vivid blues and greens of Impressionism. The woman
sits on a beach, a book facedown on the sand beside her.
She looks over her shoulder at the artist, only the edge of
her face visible, her freckles little more than smudges of
light, absences of color.
La Sirène, this one is called.
The Siren.
The last piece is a shallow carving, a silhouette sculpture
shot through with light, pinpoint tunnels burrowed through a
pane of cherry wood.
Constellation.
“Do you see it?” asks Bea.
“They’re portraits.”

351

“No,” she says, “they’re portraits of the same woman.”
Henry lifts a brow. “That’s a stretch.”
“Look at the angle of her jaw, the line of her nose, and the
freckles. Count them.”
Henry does. In every image, there are exactly seven.
Bea touches the ﬁrst and second. “The Italian one’s from
the turn of the nineteenth century. The French one is ﬁfty
years later. And this one,” she says, tapping the photo of
the sculpture, “this one’s from the sixties.”
“So maybe one was inspired by the other,” says Henry.
“Wasn’t there a tradition of—I forget what it was called, but
basically visual telephone? One artist favored something,
and then another artist favored that artist, and so on? Like a
template.”
But Bea is already waving him away. “Sure, in lexicons
and bestiaries, but not in formal schools of art. This is like
putting a girl with a pearl earring in a Warhol, and a Degas,
without ever seeing the Rembrandt. And even if she became
a template, the fact is, this ‘template’ inﬂuenced centuries
of art. She’s a piece of connective tissue between eras.
So…”
“So…” echoes Henry.
“So, who was she?” Bea’s eyes are bright, the way
Robbie’s sometimes are when he’s just nailed a
performance, or done a bump of coke, and Henry doesn’t
want to bring her down, but she’s clearly waiting for him to
say something.
“Okay,” he starts, gently. “But Bea, what if she was no
one? Even if these are based on the same woman, what if
the ﬁrst artist simply made her up?” Bea frowns, already
shaking her head. “Look,” he says, “no one wants you to
ﬁnd your thesis topic more than I do. For the sake of this
store, as much as your sanity. And this all sounds cool. But
didn’t your last proposal get nixed for being too whimsical?”

352

“Esoteric.”
“Right,” says Henry. “And if a topic like ‘Postmodernism
and its Eﬀects on New York Architecture’ was too esoteric,
how do you think Dean Parrish will feel about this?”
He gestures to the open texts, the freckled faces staring
up from every page.
Bea looks at him in silence for a long moment, and then
at the books.
“Fuck!” she shouts, taking up one of the giant books and
storming out of the shop.
Henry watches her go and sighs. “Not a library,” he calls
after her, returning the rest to their shelves.

353

New York City
March 18, 2014

IX
Henry trails oﬀ, as the realization dawns.
He’d forgotten about Bea’s attempt at ﬁnding a new
thesis, one quiet detail mixed into a very loud season, but
now, it’s obvious.
The girl in the sketch, the painting, the sculpture, is
leaning on the rail beside him, her face open in delight.
They are walking through Chelsea on the way to the High
Line, and he stops, halfway through a crosswalk, realizing
the obvious truth, the gleam of light, like a tear, in his story.
“It was you,” he says.
Addie ﬂashes a dazzling smile. “It was.”
A car honks, the ﬂashing sign gone solid in warning, and
they run to the other side.
“It’s funny, though,” she says as they climb the iron
steps. “I didn’t know about the second one. I remember
sitting on that beach, remember the man with his easel, up
on the pier, but I never found the ﬁnished piece.”
Henry shakes his head. “I thought you couldn’t leave a
mark.”
“I can’t,” she says, looking up. “I can’t hold a pen. I can’t
tell a story. I can’t wield a weapon, or make someone
remember. But art,” she says with a quieter smile, “art is
about ideas. And ideas are wilder than memories. They’re
like weeds, always ﬁnding their way up.”

354

“But no photographs. No ﬁlm.”
Her expression falters, just a fraction. “No,” she says, the
word a shape on her lips. And he feels bad for asking, for
drawing her back to the bars of her curse, instead of the
gaps she’s found between them. But then Addie straightens,
lifts her chin, smiles with an almost deﬁant kind of joy.
“But isn’t it wonderful,” she says, “to be an idea?”
They reach the High Line just as a gust of wind blows
through, the air still edged with winter, but instead of
folding in against him, sheltering from the breeze, Addie
leans into the wild gust, cheeks blushing with the cold, hair
whipping around her face, and in that moment, he can see
what every artist saw, what drew them to their pencils and
their paint, this impossible, uncatchable girl.
And even though he’s safe, both feet ﬁrmly on the
ground, Henry feels himself begin to fall.

355

New York City
September 13, 2013

X
People talk a lot about home.
Home is where the heart is, they say. There’s no place like
home. Too long away and you get homesick.
Homesick—Henry knows that one is supposed to mean
sick for home, not from it, but it still feels right. He loves his
family, he does. He just doesn’t always like them. Doesn’t
like who he is around them.
And yet, here he is, driving ninety minutes north, the city
sinking behind him as a rented car hums under his hands.
Henry knows he could take the train, it’s certainly cheaper,
but the truth is, he likes driving. Or rather, he likes the white
noise that comes with driving, the steady concreteness of
going from here to there, the directions, the control. Most of
all, he likes the inability to do anything else but drive, hands
on the wheel, eyes on the road, music blaring through the
speakers.
He oﬀered to give Muriel a ride, was secretly relieved
when she said she was taking the train already, that David
had gotten in that morning and would pick her up from the
station, which means Henry will be the last one there.
Henry is always somehow the last one there.
The closer he gets to Newburgh, the more the weather
changes in his head, a warning rumble on the horizon, a

356

storm rolling in. He takes a deep breath, bracing himself for
a Strauss family dinner.
He can picture it, the ﬁve of them sitting around the linencovered table like an awkward Ashkenazi imitation of a
Rockwell painting, a stiﬀ tableau, his mother on one end, his
father on the other, his siblings seated side by side across
the table.
David, the pillar, with his stern eyes and stiﬀ posture.
Muriel, the tornado, with her wild dark curls and constant
energy.
And Henry, the ghost (even his name doesn’t ﬁt—not
Jewish at all, but a nod to one of his father’s oldest friends).
At least they look the part of a family—a quick survey of
the table, and one can easily pick out the echo of a cheek, a
jaw, a brow. David wears his glasses just like Dad, perched
at the end of his nose so the top line of the frames cuts
across his gaze. Muriel smiles like Mom, open and easy,
laughs like her, too, head thrown back, the sound bright and
full.
Henry has his father’s loose black curls, his mother’s
gray-green eyes, but something has been lost in the
arrangement. He lacks one’s steadiness, and the other’s joy.
The set of his shoulders, the line of his mouth—these subtle
things that always make him seem more like a guest in
someone else’s house.
This is how the dinner will pass: his father and brother
talking medicine, his mother and sister talking art, and
Henry dreading the moment when the questions turn toward
him. When his mother worries aloud about everything, and
his father ﬁnds an excuse to use the word unmoored, and
David reminds him he’s almost thirty, and Muriel advises
him to commit, really commit—as if their parents aren’t still
paying her cell phone bills.

357

Henry turns oﬀ the freeway and feels the wind pick up in
his ears.
Passes through the center of town, and hears thunder in
his skull.
The static energy of tension.
He knows he’s late.
He is always late.
It has been the start of many quarrels, and there was a
time when he thought it was carelessness on his part,
before he realized it was some strange attempt at selfpreservation, an intentional, albeit subconscious dawdling, a
delay of the inevitable, uncomfortable necessity of showing
up. Being seated at that table, boxed in by his siblings,
positioned across from his parents like a criminal before a
ﬁring squad.
So Henry is late, and when his father answers the door,
he braces for the mention of timing, the chastising frown,
the cutting remark on how his brother and sister always
manage to arrive ﬁve minutes early—
But his father only smiles.
“There you are!” he says, eyes bright and warm.
And threaded with fog.
Maybe this won’t be like any other Strauss family dinner.
“Look who’s here!” calls his father, leading Henry into the
study.
“Long time no see,” says David, shaking his hand,
because even though they live in the same city—hell, on the
same subway line—the last time Henry saw his brother was
here, on the ﬁrst night of Hanukkah.
“Henry!” A blur of dark curls, and then Muriel has thrown
her arms around his neck. She kisses his cheek, leaving a
smudge of coral lipstick he will later scrub oﬀ in the hall
mirror.

358

And nowhere between the study and the dining room
does anyone comment on the length of his hair, which is
always somehow too long, or the state of the sweater he’s
wearing, which is frayed, but also the most comfortable
thing he owns.
Not once does anyone tell him that he’s too thin, or that
he needs more sun, or that he looks tired, even though all of
those usually precede the pointed remarks of how it can’t
be that hard to run a bookshop in Brooklyn.
His mother comes out of the kitchen, tugging oﬀ a pair of
oven mitts. She cups his face, and smiles, and tells him
she’s so happy he’s there.
Henry believes her.
“To the family,” toasts his father when they sit down to
eat. “Together again.”
He feels like he’s stepped into another version of his life—
not ahead, or behind, but sideways. One where his sister
looks up to him and his brother doesn’t look down, where
his parents are proud, and all the judgment has been sucked
out of the air like smoke vented from a ﬁre. He didn’t realize
how much connective tissue was made up of guilt. Without
the weight of it, he feels dizzy and light.
Euphoric.
There is no mention of Tabitha, or the failed proposal,
though of course the knowledge of their breakup has
circulated, the outcome made obvious by the empty chair
no one even tries to play oﬀ as a household tradition.
Last month on the phone, when Henry told David about
the ring, his brother wondered, almost absently, if he
thought she would actually agree. Muriel never liked her,
but Muriel never liked any of Henry’s partners. Not because
they were all too good for him, though she would have said
that too—but simply because she found them boring, an
extension of the way she felt about Henry himself.

359

Cable TV, that’s what she sometimes called them. Better
than watching paint dry, sure, but little more than reruns.
The only one she even vaguely approved of was Robbie, and
even then, Henry was sure it was mostly for the scandal it
would cause if he ever brought him home. Only Muriel
knows about Robbie, that he was ever more than a friend.
It’s the one secret that she’s managed to keep.
The whole dinner is so unnerving.
David is warm, curious.
Muriel is attentive and kind.
His father listens to everything he says, and seems
genuinely interested.
His mother tells him she’s proud.
“Of what?” he asks, genuinely confused, and she laughs
as if it’s a ridiculous question.
“Of you.”
The absence of judgment is jarring, a kind of existential
vertigo.
He tells them about running into Dean Melrose, waits for
David to point out the obvious, that he’s not qualiﬁed, waits
for his father to ask him about the catch. His mother will go
silent while his sister will go loud, exclaiming that he
changed directions for a reason, and demanding to know
the point of it all if he just crawls back.
But none of that happens.
“Good,” says his father.
“They’d be lucky to have you,” says his mother.
“You’d make a good teacher,” says David.
Only Muriel oﬀers a shadow of dissent. “You were never
happy there…”
But there’s no judgment in the words, only a ﬁerce
protectiveness.
After dinner, everyone retreats to their respective
corners, his mother to the kitchen, his father and brother to

360

the study, his sister out into the night to look at stars and
feel grounded, which is usually code for getting stoned.
Henry goes into the kitchen to help his mother with the
dishes.
“I’ll wash, you dry,” she says, handing him a towel. They
ﬁnd a pleasant rhythm, and then his mother clears her
throat.
“I’m sorry about Tabitha,” she says, her voice low, as if
she knows the subject is taboo. “I’m sorry you wasted so
much time on her.”
“It wasn’t a waste,” he says, even though it does kind of
feel that way.
She rinses a plate. “I just want you to be happy. You
deserve to be happy.” Her eyes shine, and he’s not sure if
it’s the strange frost, or simply maternal tears. “You’re
strong, and smart, and successful.”
“I don’t know about that,” Henry says, drying a plate. “I
still feel like a disappointment.”
“Don’t talk like that,” says his mother, looking genuinely
hurt. She cups his cheek. “I love you, Henry, just as you
are.” Her hand drops to the plate. “Let me ﬁnish up,” she
says. “Go ﬁnd your sister.”
Henry knows exactly where she is.
He steps out onto the back porch, sees Muriel sitting on
the porch swing, smoking a joint and looking out at the
trees, striking a pensive pose. She always sits like that, as if
waiting for someone to snap a photo. He has, once or twice,
but it always looked too stiﬀ, too framed. Trust Muriel to
make a candid look staged.
The boards creak a little under his feet now, and she
smiles without looking up. “Hey, Hen.”
“How did you know it was me?” he asks, sinking down
beside her.

361

“You have the lightest step,” she says, passing him the
joint.
Henry takes a long drag, holds the smoke in his chest
until he feels it in his head. A soft, buzzing blur. They pass
the joint back and forth, studying their parents through the
glass. Well, their parents and David, who trails behind their
father, striking the exact same poses.
“So creepy,” mutters Muriel.
“Uncanny, really.”
She chuckles. “Why don’t we hang out more?”
“You’re busy,” he says, because it’s kinder than reminding
her they aren’t really friends.
She leans her head against his shoulder. “I always have
time for you.”
They smoke in silence until there’s nothing left to smoke,
and their mother calls out that it’s time for dessert. Henry
stands, his head swimming in a pleasant way.
“Mint?” she asks, holding out a tin, but when he opens it,
he sees the pile of little pink pills. Umbrellas. He thinks of
the rain pelting down, the stranger beside him, perfectly
dry, and snaps the tin shut.
“No thanks.”
They go back inside for dessert, spend the next hour
talking about everything and nothing, and all of it is so nice,
so aggressively pleasant, so mercifully free of snide
remarks, petty squabbles, passive disapproval, that Henry
feels like he’s still holding his breath, still holding on to the
high, his lungs aching but his heart happy.
He rises, setting his coﬀee aside. “I should get going.”
“You could stay,” oﬀers his mom, and for the ﬁrst time in
ten years, he’s actually tempted, wonders what it would be
like to wake up to this, the warmth, the ease, the feeling of
family, but the truth is, the evening’s been too perfect. He
feels like he’s walking that narrow line between a good buzz

362

and a night on the bathroom ﬂoor, and he doesn’t want
anything to tip the balance.
“I have to get back,” he says, “the shop opens at ten.”
“You work so hard” is a thing his mother has never said. A
thing she apparently says now.
David grips his shoulder and looks at him with those
mercifully clouded eyes and says, “I love you, Henry. I’m
glad you’re doing so well.”
Muriel wraps her arms around his waist. “Don’t be such a
stranger.”
His father follows him out to the car, and when Henry
holds out his hand, his father pulls him in for a hug, and
says, “I’m proud of you, son.”
And part of him wants to ask why, to bait, to test the
limits of this spell, to press his father into faltering, but he
can’t bring himself to do it. He knows it’s not real, not in the
strictest sense, but he doesn’t care.
It still feels good.

363

New York City
March 18, 2014

XI
Laughter spills down from the High Line.
Built along a defunct rail, the raised park runs down the
western edge of Manhattan from Thirtieth to Twelfth. It’s
normally a pleasant place, with food carts and gardens,
tunnels and benches, winding paths and city views.
Today, it is something else entirely.
The Artifact has consumed a stretch of the elevated rail,
transformed it into a dreamlike jungle gym of color and
light. A three-dimensional landscape of whimsy and wonder.
At the entrance, a volunteer gives them colored rubber
bands to wear around their wrists. A rainbow against their
skin, each one providing access to a diﬀerent piece of the
exhibit.
“This will get you into the Sky,” she says, as if the works
of art are rides at an amusement park.
“This will get you into Voice.”
“This will get you into Memory.”
She smiles at Henry as she talks, her eyes a milky blue.
But as they move through the carnival of free exhibits, the
artists all turn to look at Addie. He may be a sun, but she is
a shining comet, dragging their focus like burning meteors
in her wake.
Nearby, a guy sculpts pieces of cotton candy as if they
were balloons, then hands out the edible works of art. Some

364

of them are recognizable shapes—here is a dog, here is a
giraﬀe, here is a dragon—while others are abstract—here is
a sunset, here is a dream, here is nostalgia.
To Henry, they all taste like sugar.
Addie kisses him, and she tastes like sugar too.
The green band gets them into Memory, which turns out
to be a sort of three-dimensional kaleidoscope, made of
colored glass—a sculpture that rises to every side, and turns
with every step.
They hold on to each other as the world bends and rights
and bends again around them, and neither says it, but both,
he thinks, are happy to get out.
The art spills into the space between the exhibits. A ﬁeld
of metal sunﬂowers. A pool of melted crayons. A curtain of
water, as thin as paper, that leaves nothing but mist on his
glasses, an iridescent shine on Addie’s skin.
The Sky, it turns out, lives inside a tunnel.
Made by a light artist, it’s a series of interlocking rooms.
From the outside, they don’t look like much, the wood
frames shells of bare construction, little more than nail and
stud, but inside—inside is everything.
They move hand in hand so they won’t lose each other.
One space is glaringly bright, the next so dark the world
seems to plunge away, and Addie shivers beside him,
ﬁngers tightening on Henry’s arm. The next is pale with fog,
like the inside of a cloud, and in the next, ﬁlaments as thin
as rain rise and fall to every side. Henry runs his ﬁngers
through the ﬁeld of silver drops, and they ring like chimes.
The last room is ﬁlled with stars.
It is a black chamber, identical to the one before it, only
this time, a thousand pinprick lights break through the
obscurity, carving a Milky Way close enough to touch—a
majesty of constellations. And even in the almost dark,

365

Henry can see Addie’s upturned face, the edges of her
smile.
“Three hundred years,” she whispers. “And you can still
ﬁnd something new.”
When they step out the other side, blinking in the
afternoon light, she is already pulling him on, out of the Sky
and on to the next archway, the next set of doors, eager to
discover whatever waits beyond.

366

New York City
September 19, 2013

XII
For once, Henry is early.
Which, he ﬁgures, is better than being late, but he
doesn’t want to be too early because that’s even worse,
even weirder and—he needs to stop overthinking it.
He smooths his shirt, checks his hair in the side of a
parked car, and goes inside.
The taqueria is bright and bustling, a concrete cavern of a
place, with garage door windows and a food truck parked in
the corner of the room, and it doesn’t matter if he’s early,
because Vanessa is already inside.
She’s traded the barista apron for leggings and a print
dress, and her blond hair, which he’s only seen pulled up,
hangs in loose waves around her face, and when she sees
him, she breaks into a smile.
“I’m glad you called,” she says.
And Henry smiles back. “So am I.”
They order using slips of paper and those little pencils
Henry hasn’t seen since he played mini-golf one time when
he was ten, ﬁngers brushing as she points to tacos and he
ﬁlls them in. Their hands touch again over the chips, legs
skimming beneath the metal table, and each time it’s like a
tiny burst of light inside his chest.
And for once, he isn’t talking himself in and out of every
single line, isn’t chiding himself for each and every move,

367

isn’t convincing himself that he has to say the right thing—
there’s no need to ﬁnd the right words when there are no
wrong ones. He doesn’t have to lie, doesn’t have to try,
doesn’t have to be anyone but himself, because he is
enough.
The food is great, but the place is noisy, voices echoing
oﬀ high ceilings, and Henry cringes when someone scrapes
their chair back over the concrete ﬂoor. “Sorry,” he says. “I
know it’s not fancy.”
He picked the place, knows they probably should have
just gone for drinks, but it’s New York, and cocktails cost
twice as much as food, and he can barely aﬀord even this
on a bookseller’s wages.
“Dude,” she says, stirring an agua fresca, “I work in a
coﬀee shop.”
“At least you get tips.”
Vanessa feigns shock. “What, they don’t tip booksellers?”
“Nope.”
“Not even when you recommend a good book?”
He shakes his head.
“That’s a crime,” she says. “You should put a jar on the
counter.”
“What would I say?” He raps his ﬁngers on the table.
“Books feed hungry minds. Tips feed the cat?”
Vanessa laughs, sudden and bright. “You’re so funny.”
“Am I?”
She sticks out her tongue. “Fishing for compliments, are
we?”
“No,” he says. “Just curious. What do you see in me?”
Vanessa smiles, suddenly shy. “You’re … well, it sounds
cheesy, but you’re exactly what I’ve been looking for.”
“And what’s that?” he asks.
If she said real, sensitive, thoughtful, he might have
bought it.

368

But she doesn’t.
She uses words like outgoing, funny, ambitious, and the
more she talks about him, the thicker the frost in her eyes,
the more it spreads, until he can barely make out the color
beneath. And Henry wonders how she can see, but of
course, she can’t.
That’s the point.

They’re at the Merchant a week later, he and Bea and
Robbie, three beers and a basket of fries between them.
“How’s Vanessa?” she asks, while Robbie looks pointedly
into his drink.
“She’s ﬁne,” says Henry.
And she is. He is. They are.
“Been seeing a lot of her.”
Henry frowns. “You’re the one who told me to get Tabitha
out of my system.”
Bea holds up her hands. “I know, I know.”
“It’s new. You know how things are. She’s—”
“A carbon copy,” mumbles Robbie.
Henry turns on him. “What was that?” he asks, annoyed.
“Speak up. I know they taught you how to project.”
Robbie takes a long swig of beer, looking miserable. “I’m
just saying, she’s a carbon copy of Tabby. Waiﬁsh, blond—”
“Female?”
It’s a long-running sore point between them, the fact that
Henry isn’t gay, that he’s attracted to a person ﬁrst and
their gender second. Robbie cringes, but doesn’t apologize.
“Besides,” says Henry. “I didn’t go after Vanessa. She
picked me. She likes me.”
“Do you like her?” asks Bea.
“Of course,” he says, a little too fast. He likes her. And
sure, he also likes that she likes him (the him that she sees)
369

and there’s a Venn diagram between those two, a place
where they overlap. He’s pretty sure he’s safely in the
shaded zone. He’s not really using her, is he? At least, he’s
not the only one being shallow—she’s using him, too,
painting someone else onto the canvas of her life. And if it’s
mutual, well then, it’s not his fault … is it?
“We just want you to be happy,” Bea’s saying. “After all
that’s happened, just … don’t go too fast.”
But for once, he’s not the one who needs to slow down.
Henry woke up that morning to chocolate-chip pancakes
and a glass of OJ, a little handwritten note on the counter
beside the plate with a heart and a V. She’s slept over the
last three nights, and each time, she left something behind.
A blouse. A pair of shoes. A toothbrush in the holder by the
sink.
His friends stare at him, pale fog still swirling through
their eyes, and he knows that they care, knows they love
him, knows they only want the best for him. They have to
now, thanks to the deal.
“Don’t worry,” he says, sipping his beer. “I’ll take it slow.”

“Henry…”
He’s half-asleep when he feels her run a painted nail
down his back.
Weak gray light spills through the windows.
“Hm?” he says, rolling over.
Vanessa’s got her head on one hand, blond hair spilling
down over the pillow, and he wonders how long she was
leaning like that, waiting for him to wake up, before she
ﬁnally intervened.
“I need to tell you something.” She gazes at him, eyes
frosted with that milky light. He is beginning to dread that
shine, the pale smoke that follows him from face to face.
370

“What is it?” he asks, rising onto one elbow. “What’s
wrong?”
“Nothing. I just…” She breaks into a smile. “I love you.”
And the scary thing is, she sounds like she means it.
“You don’t have to say it back. I know it’s soon. I just
wanted you to know.”
She nuzzles against him.
“Are you sure?” he asks. “I mean, it’s only been a week.”
“So what?” she says. “When you know, you know. And I
know.”
Henry swallows, kisses her temple. “I’m going to take a
shower.”
He stands under the hot water as long as he can,
wondering what he’s supposed to say to that, if and how he
can convince Vanessa that it isn’t love, it’s just obsession,
but of course, that isn’t really true, either. He made the
deal. He made the terms. This is what he wanted.
Isn’t it?
He cuts the water oﬀ, wraps the towel around his waist,
and smells smoke.
Not the scent of a match lighting a candle, or something
boiling over on the stove, but the char-black smell of things
that aren’t supposed to be on ﬁre, and are now burning.
Henry surges out into the hall, and sees Vanessa in the
kitchen, standing at the counter, a box of matches in one
hand, and the cardboard box of Tabitha’s things burning in
the sink.
“What are you doing?” he demands.
“You’re holding on to the past,” she says, striking another
match and tossing it into the box. “Like, literally holding on.
You’ve had this box as long as we’ve been together.”
“I’ve only known you a week!” he shouts, but she presses
on.

371

“And you deserve better. You deserve to be happy. You
deserve to live in the present. This is a good thing. This is
closure. This is—”
He knocks the matches from her hand and pushes her
aside, reaching for the tap.
The water hits the box in a sizzle, sending up a plume of
smoke as it douses the ﬂames.
“Vanessa,” he says, gritting his teeth, “I need you to go.”
“Like, home?”
“Like, go.”
“Henry,” she says, touching his arm. “What did I do
wrong?”
And he could point to the smoldering remains in his
kitchen sink, or the fact it’s all going way too fast, or the
fact that when she looks at him, she sees someone else
entirely. But instead, he just says, “It’s not you. It’s me.”
“No, it’s not,” she says, tears sliding down her face.
“I need some space, okay?”
“I’m sorry,” she sobs, clinging to him. “I’m sorry. I love
you.”
Her limbs are wrapped around his waist, head buried in
his side, and for a second, he thinks he might have to
physically pry her oﬀ.
“Vanessa, let go.”
He guides her away, and she looks devastated, ruined.
She looks the way he felt the night he made the deal, and it
breaks his heart at the thought that she will walk out feeling
that lost, that alone.
“I care about you,” he says, gripping her shoulders. “I
care about you, I do.”
She brightens, just a little. A wilting plant fed water. “So
you’re not mad?”
Of course he’s mad.
“No, I’m not mad.”

372

She buries her face in his front, and he strokes her hair.
“You care about me.”
“I do.” He untangles himself. “I’ll call you. I promise.”
“You promise,” she echoes as he helps her gather her
things.
“I promise,” he says as he leads her down the hall, and
out.
The door shuts between them, and Henry sags back
against it as the smoke alarm ﬁnally begins to ring.

373

New York City
October 23, 2013

XIII
“Movie night!”
Robbie ﬂings himself across Henry’s sofa like a starﬁsh,
long limbs hanging oﬀ the back and sides. Bea rolls her eyes
and shoves him over. “Make room.”
Henry plucks the bag from the microwave, bouncing it
from hand to hand to avoid the steam. He dumps the
popcorn into the bowl.
“What’s the movie?” he asks, rounding the counter.
“The Shining.”
Henry groans. He’s never been a fan of scary movies, but
Robbie loves a reason to scream, treats the whole thing like
another kind of performance, and it’s his week to choose.
“It’s Halloween!” defends Robbie.
“It’s the twenty-third,” says Henry, but Robbie treats
holidays the way he treats birthdays, stretching them from
days into weeks, and sometimes into seasons.
“Costume roll call,” says Bea.
Dressing up, he thinks, is just like watching cartoons,
something you enjoyed as a kid, before it passes through
the no man’s land of teen angst, the ironic age of early
twenties. And then somehow, miraculously, it crosses back
into the realm of the genuine, the nostalgic. A place
reserved for wonder.

374

Robbie strikes a pose from the sofa. “Ziggy Stardust,” he
says, which makes sense. He’s spent the last several years
working through Bowie’s various incarnations. Last year it
was the Thin White Duke.
Bea announces she’s going as the Dread Pirate Roberts,
pun intended, and Robbie reaches out and picks up a
camera from Henry’s coﬀee table, a vintage Nikon currently
playing the part of paperweight. He cranes his head back,
and peers at Henry through the viewﬁnder upside down.
“What about you?”
Henry’s always loved Halloween—not the scary part, just
the excuse to change, be someone else. Robbie says he
should have just become an actor, that they get to play
dress-up all year round, but the thought of living life
onstage makes him queasy. He’s been Freddie Mercury, and
the Mad Hatter, Tuxedo Mask, and the Joker.
But right now, he already feels like somebody else.
“I’m already in costume,” he says, gesturing at his usual
black jeans, his narrow shirt. “Can’t you tell who I am?”
“Peter Parker?” ventures Bea.
“A bookseller?”
“Harry Potter having a quarter-life crisis?”
Henry laughs and shakes his head.
Bea narrows her eyes. “You haven’t picked anything yet,
have you?”
“No,” he admits, “but I will.”
Robbie is still ﬁddling with the camera. He turns it around,
purses his lips, and snaps a photo. The camera gives a
hollow click. There’s no ﬁlm. Bea plucks it from his hands.
“Why don’t you take more photos?” she asks. “You’re
really good.”
Henry shrugs, unsure if she means it. “Maybe in another
life,” he says, handing each of them a beer.
“You still could, you know,” she says. “It’s not too late.”

375

Maybe, but if he started now, would the photos stand on
their own, judged good or bad on their own merits? Or
would each and every picture carry his wish forward? Would
every person see the picture they wanted to see, instead of
the one he made? Would he ever trust them if they did?
The movie starts, and Robbie insists on turning out all the
lights, the three of them crammed together on the couch.
They force Robbie to leave the bowl of popcorn on the table
so he can’t throw it at the ﬁrst scary moment, so Henry
doesn’t have to pick up kernels after they’re gone, and he
spends the next hour averting his eyes every time the score
whines in warning.
When the boy rolls his tricycle down the hall, Bea
mutters, “Nope, nope, nope,” and Robbie sits forward,
leaning into the scare, and Henry buries his face in his
shoulder. The twin girls appear, hand in hand, and Robbie
grabs Henry’s leg.
And when the moment passes, a lull in the fear, Robbie’s
hand is still resting on his thigh. And it’s like a broken cup
coming back together, the shattered edges lining up just
right—which is, of course, wrong.
Henry gets up, taking the empty popcorn bowl and
heading for the kitchen.
Robbie swings his leg up over the back of the sofa. “I’ll
help.”
“It’s popcorn,” Henry says over his shoulder as he rounds
the corner. He tears the plastic wrapper oﬀ, shakes the
pouch. “I’m pretty sure I just put the bag in the microwave
and press the button.”
“You always let it go too long,” says Robbie, right behind
him.
Henry tosses the pouch into the microwave and swings
the door shut. He presses Start, turns back toward the door.
“So now you’re the popcorn poli—”

376

He doesn’t get a chance to ﬁnish before Robbie’s mouth
is on his. Henry sucks in a breath, surprised by the sudden
kiss, but Robbie doesn’t break away. He presses him back
into the counter, hips into hips, ﬁngers sliding along his jaw
as the kiss deepens.
And this, this is better than all the other nights.
This is better than the attention of a hundred strangers.
This is the diﬀerence between a hotel bed and home.
Robbie is hard against him, and Henry’s chest aches with
want, and it would be so easy, to fall back into this, to return
to the familiar warmth of his kiss, his body, the simple
comfort of something real.
But that’s the problem.
It was real. They were real. But like everything in Henry’s
life, it ended. Failed.
He breaks the kiss as the ﬁrst kernels begin to pop.
“I’ve been waiting weeks to do that,” whispers Robbie, his
cheeks ﬂushed, his eyes fever bright. But they’re not clear.
Fog winds through them, clouding the vivid blue.
Henry lets out a shuddering breath, rubs his own eyes
beneath his glasses.
The popcorn rattles and pops, and Henry pulls Robbie into
the hall, away from Bea and the horror movie score, and
Robbie starts toward him again, thinking it’s an invitation,
but Henry puts his hand out, holding him back. “This is a
mistake.”
“No, it’s not,” says Robbie. “I love you. I always have.”
And it sounds so honest, so real, Henry has to squeeze his
eyes shut to focus. “Then why did you break up with me?”
“What? I don’t know. You were diﬀerent, we weren’t a ﬁt.”
“How?” presses Henry.
“You didn’t know what you wanted.”
“I wanted you. I wanted you to be happy.”

377

Robbie shakes his head. “It can’t just be about the other
person. You have to be someone, too. You have to know who
you are. Back then, you didn’t.” He smiles. “But now you
do.”
But that’s just it.
He doesn’t.
Henry has no idea who he is, and now, neither does
anyone else.
He just feels lost. But this is the one road he won’t take.
He and Robbie were friends before they were more,
friends again for years after Robbie called it oﬀ, when Henry
was still in love with him, and now it’s reversed, and
Robbie’s going to have to ﬁnd a way to move on, or at least,
ﬁnd a way to smooth in love into love, the way Henry had
done when it was him.
“How long does it take to make popcorn?” shouts Bea.
A singed smell wafts from microwave, and Henry pushes
past Robbie into the kitchen, hits the Stop button, pulls the
bag out.
But he’s too late.
The popcorn is irretrievably burned.

378

New York City
November 14, 2013

XIV
Thank god Brooklyn has so many coﬀee shops.
Henry hasn’t been back into Roast, not since the Great
Fire of 2013, as Robbie calls the whole Vanessa incident
(with a little too much glee). He gets to the front of the line
and orders a latte from a very nice guy named Patrick who
is mercifully straight, who looks at him with cloudy eyes but
only seems to see a perfect customer, someone friendly,
and brief, and—
“Henry?”
His stomach drops. Because he knows that voice, high
and sweet, knows the way it bends around his name, and it
is that night again, and he is down on one knee like a fool as
she says no.
You’re great. You really are. But you’re not …
He turns around, and there she is.
“Tabitha.”
Her hair has gotten a little longer, the bangs grown out
into a sweep of blond across her forehead, a curl against her
cheek, and she stands with the easy grace of a dancer
between poses. Henry hasn’t seen her since that night, has
managed, until now, to avoid her, to avoid this. And he
wants to back away, to put as much distance between them
as possible. But his legs refuse to move.

379

She smiles at him, bright and warm. He remembers being
in love with that smile, back when it felt like a victory every
time he earned a glimpse. Now she simply hands it to him,
brown eyes shrouded in fog.
“I’ve missed you,” she says. “I’ve missed you so much.”
“I’ve missed you, too,” he says, because it is the truth.
Two years of a life together, replaced by a life apart, and
there will always be an empty space in the shape of her. “I
had a box of your things,” he says, “but there was a ﬁre.”
“Oh god.” She touches his arm. “Are you okay? Was
anyone hurt?”
“No, no.” He shakes his head, thinking of Vanessa
standing over the sink. “It was … contained.”
Tabitha sways into him. “Oh, good.”
Up close, she smells like lilacs. It took a week for that
scent to fade from his sheets, another for it to vanish from
the sofa cushions, the shower towels. She leans into him,
and it would be so easy to lean back, to give in to the same
dangerous gravity that drew him to Robbie, the familiar pull
of something loved, and lost, and then returned.
But it isn’t real.
It isn’t real.
“Tabitha,” he says, guiding her back. “You ended things.”
“No.” She shakes her head. “I wasn’t ready to take the
next step. But I never wanted it to end. I love you, Henry.”
And despite it all, he falters. Because he believes her. Or
at least, he believes that she believes herself, and that is
worse, because it still doesn’t make it real.
“Can’t we try again?” she asks.
Henry swallows, and shakes his head.
He wants to ask her what she sees, to understand the
chasm between who he was and what she wanted. But he
doesn’t ask.
Because in the end, it doesn’t matter.

380

The fog twists across her vision. And he knows that,
whoever she sees, it isn’t him.
It never was.
It never will be.
So he lets her go.

381

New York City
March 18, 2014

XV
Henry and Addie oﬀer up their rubber bands to the Artifact,
sacriﬁcing one color at a time.
For the purple band, they walk through puddles, inchthick pools that ripple around their feet. Beneath the water,
the ground is made of mirrors, shimmering, reﬂecting
everyone and everything. Addie stares down at the ribbons
of motion, the ripples fading, and if hers end a moment
sooner than his, it is hard to say.
For the yellow, they are guided into soundproof cubes the
size of closets, ones that amplify the noise, and others that
seem to swallow every breath. It is a hall of mirrors, if the
bending surfaces warped a voice instead of a reﬂection.
The ﬁrst message tells them to WHISPER, the word stenciled
on the wall in small, black type, and when Addie whispers “I
have a secret,” the words bend and loop and wrap around
them.
The next tells them to SHOUT, this stenciled word as large
as the wall it’s written on. Henry can’t bring himself to go
above a small, self-conscious holler, but Addie draws a
breath and roars, the way you would beneath a bridge if a
train was going by, and something in the fearless freedom
of it gives him air, and suddenly he is emptying his lungs,
the sound guttural and broken, as wild as a scream.

382

And Addie doesn’t shrink away. She simply raises her
voice, and together they shout themselves breathless, they
scream themselves hoarse, they leave the cubes feeling
dizzy and light. His lungs will hurt tomorrow, and it will be
worth it.
By the time they stumble out, sound rushing back into
their ears, the sun is going down, and the clouds are on ﬁre,
one of those strange spring nights that casts an orange light
on everything.
They walk over to the nearest rail and look out at the city,
the light reﬂecting on the buildings, streaking sunset across
steel, and Henry pulls her back against him, kisses the crook
of her neck, smiling into her collar.
He is sugar-high and a little drunk, and happier than he
has ever been.
Addie is better than any little pink umbrella.
She is better than strong whisky on a cold night.
Better than anything he’s felt in ages.
When Henry is with her, time speeds up, and it doesn’t
scare him.
When he is with Addie, he feels alive, and it doesn’t hurt.
She leans back against him, as if he is the umbrella, and
she the one in need of shelter. And Henry holds his breath,
as if that will keep the sky aloft. As if that will keep the days
from passing.
As if that will keep it all from falling down.

383

New York City
December 9, 2013

XVI
Bea always says returning to campus is like coming home.
But it doesn’t feel that way to Henry. Then again, he
never felt at home at home, only a vague sense of dread,
the eggshell-laden walk of someone constantly in danger of
disappointing. And that’s pretty much what he feels now, so
maybe she’s right, after all.
“Mr. Strauss,” says the dean, reaching across the desk.
“I’m so glad you could make it.”
They shake hands, and Henry lowers himself into the
oﬃce chair. The same chair he sat in three years ago when
Dean Melrose threatened to fail him if he didn’t have the
sense to leave. And now—
You want to be enough.
“Sorry it took me so long,” he says, but the dean waves
away the apology.
“You’re a busy man, I’m sure.”
“Right,” says Henry, shifting in his seat. His suit chafes;
too many months spent among mothballs in the back of the
closet. He doesn’t know what to do with his hands.
“So,” he says awkwardly, “you said there was a position
open, in the theology school, but you didn’t say if it was
adjunct or an aide.”
“It’s tenure.”

384

Henry stares at the salt-and-pepper man across the table,
and has to resist the urge to laugh in his face. A tenure track
isn’t just coveted, it’s cutthroat. People spend years vying
for those positions.
“And you thought of me.”
“The moment I saw you in that café,” says the dean with
a fundraising smile.
You want to be whatever they want.
The dean sits forward in his chair. “The question, Mr.
Strauss, is simple. What do you want for yourself?”
The words echo through his head, a terrible,
reverberating symmetry.
It’s the same question Melrose asked that autumn day
when he called Henry into his oﬃce, three years into his
PhD, and told him it was over. On some level, Henry knew it
was coming. He’d already transferred from the theological
seminary into the broader religious studies program, focus
sliding over and between themes that a hundred people had
already explored, unable to ﬁnd new ground, unable to
believe.
“What do you want for yourself?” he’d asked, and Henry
considered saying my parents’ pride, but that didn’t seem
like a good answer, so he’d said the next truest thing—that
he honestly wasn’t sure. That he’d blinked and somehow
years had gone by, and everyone else had carved their
trenches, paved their paths, and he was still standing in a
ﬁeld, uncertain where to dig.
The dean had listened, and leaned his elbows on the table
and told him that he was good.
But good wasn’t enough.
Which meant, of course, he wasn’t enough.
“What do you want for yourself?” the dean asks now. And
Henry still doesn’t have any other answer.
“I don’t know.”

385

And this is the part where the dean shakes his head,
where he realizes that Henry Strauss is still as lost as ever.
Only he doesn’t, of course. He smiles and says, “That’s
okay. It’s good to be open. But you do want to come back,
don’t you?”
Henry is silent. He sits with the question.
He always liked learning. Loved it, really. If he could have
spent his whole life sitting in a lecture hall, taking notes,
could have drifted from department to department,
haunting diﬀerent studies, soaking up language and history
and art, maybe he would have felt full, happy.
That’s how he spent the ﬁrst two years.
And those ﬁrst two years, he was happy. He had Bea, and
Robbie, and all he had to do was learn. Build a foundation. It
was the house, the one that he was supposed to build on
top of that smooth surface, that was the problem.
It was just so … permanent.
Choosing a class became choosing a discipline, and
choosing a discipline became choosing a career, and
choosing a career became choosing a life, and how was
anyone supposed to do that, when you only had one?
But teaching, teaching might be a way to have what he
wanted.
Teaching is an extension of learning, a way to be a
perpetual student.
And yet. “I’m not qualiﬁed, sir.”
“You’re an unconventional choice,” the dean admits, “but
that doesn’t mean you’re the wrong one.”
Except in this case, that’s exactly what it means.
“I don’t have my doctorate.”
The frost spreads into a sheen of ice across the dean’s
vision. “You have a fresh perspective.”
“Aren’t there requirements?”

386

“There are, but there’s a measure of latitude, to account
for diﬀerent backgrounds.”
“I don’t believe in God.”
The words tumble out like stones, landing heavy on the
desk between them.
And Henry realizes, now that they’re out, that they aren’t
entirely true. He doesn’t know what he believes, hasn’t for a
long time, but it’s hard to entirely discount the presence of a
higher power when he recently sold his soul to a lower one.
Henry realizes the room is still quiet.
The dean looks at him for a long moment, and he thinks
he’s done it, he’s broken through.
But then Melrose leans forward, and says, in a measured
tone, “I don’t either.” He sits back. “Mr. Strauss, we are an
academic institution, not a church. Dissent is at the heart of
dissemination.”
But that’s the problem. No one will dissent. Henry looks at
Dean Melrose, and imagines seeing that same blind
acceptance on the face of every faculty member, every
teacher, every student, and feels ill. They’ll look at him, and
see exactly what they want. Who they want. And even if he
comes across someone who wants to argue, who relishes
conﬂict or debate, it won’t be real.
None of it will ever be real again.
Across the table, the dean’s eyes are a milky gray. “You
can have anything you want, Mr. Strauss. Be anyone you
want. And we’d like to have you here.” He stands, holds out
his hand. “Think about it.”
Henry says, “I will.”
And he does.
He thinks about it on the way across campus, and on the
subway, every station carrying him farther away from that
life. The one that was, and the one that wasn’t. Thinks about
it as he unlocks the store, shrugs out of the ill-ﬁtting coat

387

and ﬂings it onto the nearest shelf, undoes the tie at his
throat. Thinks about it as he feeds the cat, and unpacks the
latest box of books, gripping them until his ﬁngers ache, but
at least they’re solid, they’re real, and he can feel the storm
clouds forming in his head, so he goes into the back room,
ﬁnds the bottle of Meredith’s whisky, a few ﬁngers’ worth
leftover from the day after his deal, and carries it back to
the front of the store.
It’s not even noon, but Henry doesn’t care.
He pulls out the cork and ﬁlls a coﬀee cup as the
customers ﬁlter in, waiting for someone to shoot him a dirty
look, to shake their head in disapproval, or mutter
something, or even leave. But they all just keep shopping,
keep smiling, keep looking at Henry as if he can’t do
anything wrong.
Finally, an oﬀ-duty cop comes in, and Henry doesn’t even
try to hide the bottle by the till. Instead, he looks straight at
the man and takes a long drink from his cup, certain that
he’s breaking some law, either because of the open
container, or the public intoxication.
But the cop only smiles, and raises an imaginary glass.
“Cheers,” he says, eyes frosting over as he speaks.
Take a drink every time you hear a lie.
You’re a great cook.
(They say as you burn toast.)
You’re so funny.
(You’ve never told a joke.)
You’re so …
… handsome.
… ambitious.
… successful.
… strong.

388

(Are you drinking yet?)
You’re so …
… charming.
… clever.
… sexy.
(Drink.)
So conﬁdent.
So shy.
So mysterious.
So open.
You are impossible, a paradox, a collection at odds.
You are everything to everyone.
The son they never had.
The friend they always wanted.
A generous stranger.
A successful son.
A perfect gentleman.
A perfect partner.
A perfect …
Perfect …
(Drink.)
They love your body.
Your abs.
Your laugh.
The way you smell.
The sound of your voice.
They want you.
(Not you.)
They need you.
(Not you.)
They love you.
(Not you.)
You are whoever they want you to be.

389

You are more than enough, because you are not
real.
You are perfect, because you don’t exist.
(Not you.)
(Never you.)
They look at you and see whatever they want …
Because they don’t see you at all.

390

New York City
December 31, 2013

XVII
The clock is ticking down, the last minutes of the year
dropping away. Everyone says to live in the now, to savor
the moment, but it’s hard when the moment involves a
hundred people crammed into a rent-controlled apartment
in Bed-Stuy that Robbie is sharing with two other actors.
Henry is trapped in a hall corner, where the coatrack meets
a closet. He has a beer hanging from one hand and the
other tangled in the shirt of the guy kissing him, a guy
who’s deﬁnitely out of Henry’s league, or who would be, if
Henry still had one.
He thinks the guy’s name is Mark, but it was hard to hear
over all the noise. It could be Max, or Malcolm. Henry
doesn’t know. And he wants to say this is the ﬁrst person
he’s kissed tonight, even the ﬁrst guy, but the truth is, he
isn’t sure about that either. Isn’t sure how many drinks he’s
had, or if the taste melting on his tongue right now is sugar,
or something else.
Henry has been drinking too much, too fast, trying to
wash away, and there are too many people in the Castle.
The Castle, that’s what they call Robbie’s place, though
Henry can’t remember exactly when they christened it that,
or why. He searches for Bea, hasn’t seen her since he waded
through the crowd into the kitchen an hour before, saw her

391

perched on the counter, playing bartender and holding court
for a group of women and—
Suddenly the guy is fumbling with Henry’s belt.
“Wait,” he says, but the music is loud enough he has to
shout, has to pull Mark/Max/Malcolm’s ear against his
mouth, which Mark/Max/Malcolm takes as a sign to keep
kissing him.
“Wait,” he shouts, pushing back. “Do you even want
this?”
Which is a stupid question. Or at least, the wrong one.
The pale smoke swirls in the stranger’s eyes. “Why
wouldn’t I?” he asks, sinking to his knees. But Henry catches
his elbow.
“Stop. Just stop.” He pulls him up. “What do you see in
me?”
A question he has come to ask of everyone, hoping to
hear something like the truth. But the guy looks at him,
eyes clouded with frost, and rattles oﬀ the words, “You’re
gorgeous. Sexy. Smart.”
“How do you know?” Henry shouts over the music.
“What?” the other guy shouts back.
“How do you know I’m smart? We barely spoke.”
But Mark/Max/Malcolm only smiles a sloppy, heavy-lidded
grin, his mouth red from kissing, and says, “I just know,”
and it’s not enough anymore, it’s not okay, and Henry’s in
the process of untangling himself when Robbie rounds the
corner, and sees Mark/Max/Malcolm practically mounting
Henry in the hall. Robbie looks at him as if he’s ﬂung a beer
in his face.
He turns, and leaves, and Henry groans, and the guy
grinding against him seems to think the sound is for him,
and it’s too hot in here for Henry to think, to breathe.
The room is starting to spin, and Henry murmurs
something about having to pee, but walks straight past the

392

toilet and into Robbie’s room, shutting the door behind him.
He goes to the window, shoves up the glass, and is hit full in
the face with a blast of icy cold. It bites at his skin as he
climbs out onto the ﬁre escape.
He sucks in a breath of cold air, lets it burn his lungs, has
to lean on the window to get it shut again, but the moment
the glass comes down, the world hushes.
It’s not quiet—New York is never quiet—and New Year’s
has sent a current rippling through the city, but at least he
can breathe, can think, can wash away the night—the year
—in relative peace.
He goes to take a swig of beer, but the bottle’s empty.
“Fuck,” he mutters to no one but himself.
He’s freezing, his coat buried somewhere in the pile on
Robbie’s bed, but he can’t bring himself to go back inside
for a jacket or a drink. Can’t bear the tide of turning heads,
the smoke ﬁlling their eyes, doesn’t want the weight of their
attention. And he can see the irony in that, he really can.
Right now he’d give anything for one of Muriel’s little pink
umbrellas, but he’s run out, so he sinks down onto the
freezing metal steps, tells himself he’s happy, tells himself
that this is what he wanted.
He sets the empty bottle beside a pot that used to be
home to a plant. Right now it holds only a small mountain of
cigarette stubs.
Sometimes Henry wishes he smoked, just for the excuse
to get some air.
He tried once or twice, but he couldn’t get over the taste
of tar, the stale smell it left on his clothes. He had this one
aunt growing up who smoked until her nails went yellow and
her skin cracked like old leather, until every cough sounded
like she had loose change rattling in her chest. Every time
he took a drag, he thought of her, and felt ill, and he didn’t

393

know if it was the memory or the taste, only knew it wasn’t
worth it.
There was pot, of course, but pot was something you
were supposed to share with other people, not sneak away
to smoke alone, and anyway, it always made him hungry
and sad. Or really, sadder. It didn’t iron out any of the
wrinkles in his brain, after too many hits just made them
into spirals, thoughts turning in and in and in on themselves
forever.
He has this vivid memory of getting stoned senior year,
he and Bea and Robbie lying in a tangle of limbs on the
Columbia quad at three in the morning, high as kites and
staring up at the sky. And even though they had to squint to
make out any stars, and it might have just been their eyes
struggling for purchase on the black expanse, Bea and
Robbie went on and on about how big it all was, how
wonderful, how calm it made them feel to be so small, and
Henry didn’t say anything because he was too busy holding
his breath to keep from screaming.
“What the hell are you doing out here?”
Bea is leaning out the window. She swings her leg over
the sill, and joins him out on the step, hissing when her
leggings meet the cold metal. They sit in silence for a few
moments. Henry stares out over the buildings. The clouds
are low, the lights of Times Square shining up against them.
“Robbie’s in love with me,” he says.
“Robbie’s always been in love with you,” says Bea.
“But that’s the thing,” he says, shaking his head. “He
wasn’t in love with who I was, not really. He was in love with
who I could have been. He wanted me to change, and I
didn’t, and—”
“Why should you change?” She turns to look at him, the
frost swirling across her vision. “You’re perfect, just the way
you are.”

394

Henry swallows.
“And what is that?” he asks. “What am I?”
He’s been afraid to ask, afraid to know the meaning of the
shine in her eyes, what she sees when she looks at him.
Even now, he wishes he could take it back. But Bea just
smiles and says, “You’re my best friend, Henry.”
His chest loosens, just a little. Because that’s real.
It’s true.
But then she keeps going.
“You’re sweet, and sensitive, and an amazing listener.”
And that last part makes his stomach drop, because
Henry’s never been a good listener. He’s lost count of the
number of ﬁghts they’ve gotten in because he wasn’t
paying attention.
“You’re always there when I need you,” she goes on, and
his chest aches, because he knows he hasn’t been, and this
isn’t like all the other lies, this isn’t washboard abs, or a
chiseled jaw or a deep voice, this isn’t witty charm, or the
son you’ve always wanted, or the brother you miss, this isn’t
any of the thousand things other people see when they look
at him, things out of his control.
“I wish you saw yourself the way I see you.”
What Bea sees is a good friend.
And Henry has no excuse for not already being one.
He puts his head in his hands, presses his palms against
his eyes until he sees stars, and wonders if he can ﬁx this,
just this, if he can become the version of Henry that Bea
sees, if it will make the frost in her eyes go away again, if
she, at least, will see him clearly.
“I’m sorry,” he whispers into the space between his knees
and chest.
He feels her run her ﬁngers through his hair. “For what?”
And what is he supposed to say?

395

Henry lets out a shuddering breath, and looks up. “If you
could have anything,” he says, “what would you ask for?”
“That depends,” she says. “What’s the cost?”
“How do you know there’s a cost?”
“There’s always give and take.”
“Okay,” says Henry, “if you sold your soul for one thing,
what would it be?”
Bea chews her lip. “Happiness.”
“What is that?” he asks. “I mean, is it just feeling happy
for no reason? Or is it making other people happy? Is it
being happy with your job, or your life, or—”
Bea laughs. “You always overthink things, Henry.” She
looks out over the ﬁre escape. “I don’t know, I guess I just
mean I’d want to be happy with myself. Satisﬁed. What
about you?”
He thinks of lying, doesn’t. “I think I’d want to be loved.”
Bea looks at him, then, eyes swirling with frost, and even
through the mist, she looks suddenly, immeasurably sad.
“You can’t make people love you, Hen. If it’s not a choice, it
isn’t real.”
Henry’s mouth goes dry.
She’s right. Of course she’s right.
And he’s an idiot, trapped in a world where nothing’s real.
Bea knocks her shoulder against his. “Come back in,” she
says. “Find someone to kiss before midnight. It’s good luck.”
She rises, waiting, but Henry can’t bring himself to stand.
“It’s okay,” he says. “You go.”
And he knows it’s the deal he’s made, knows it’s what she
sees and not what he is—but he’s still relieved when Bea
sits back down, and leans against him, a best friend staying
with him in the dark. And soon the music dims, and the
voices rise, and Henry can hear the countdown at their
back.
Ten, nine, eight.

396

Oh god.
Seven, six, ﬁve.
What has he done?
Four, three, two.
It’s going too fast.
One.
The air ﬁlls with whistles and cheers and wishes and Bea
presses her lips against his, a moment of warmth against
the cold. Just like that, the year is gone, the clocks reset, a
three replaced by a four, and Henry knows that he has
made a terrible mistake.
He has asked the wrong god for the wrong thing, and now
he is enough because he is nothing. He is perfect, because
he isn’t there.
“It’s going to be a good year,” says Bea. “I can feel it.”
She sighs a plume of fog into the air between them. “Fuck,
it’s freezing.” She stands, rubbing her hands. “Let’s go in.”
“You go ahead,” he says, “I’ll be there soon.”
And she believes him, her steps clanking as she crosses
the ﬁre escape and slips back through the window, leaving it
open for him to follow.
Henry sits there, alone in the dark, until he cannot stand
the cold.

397

New York City
Winter 2014

XVIII
Henry gives up.
Resigns himself to the prism of his deal, which he has
come to think of as a curse. He tries—to be a better friend, a
better brother, a better son, tries to forget the meaning of
the fog in people’s eyes, tries to pretend that it is real, that
he is real.
And then, one day, he meets a girl.
She walks into the store and steals a book, and when he
catches her in the street, and she turns to look at him, there
is no frost, no ﬁlm, no wall of ice. Just clear brown eyes in a
heart-shaped face, seven freckles scattered across her
cheeks like stars.
And Henry thinks it must be a trick of the light, but she
comes back the next day, and there it is again. The
absence. Not just an absence, either, but something in its
place.
A presence, a solid weight, the ﬁrst steady pull he’s felt in
months. The strength of someone else’s gravity.
Another orbit.
And when the girl looks at him, she doesn’t see perfect.
She sees someone who cares too much, who feels too
much, who is lost, and hungry, and wasting inside his curse.
She sees the truth, and he doesn’t know how, or why,
only knows that he doesn’t want it to end.

398

Because for the ﬁrst time in months, in years, in his whole
life, perhaps, Henry doesn’t feel cursed at all.
For the ﬁrst time, he feels seen.

399

New York City
March 18, 2014

XIX
There is only one exhibit left.
As the light thins, Henry and Addie hand over their blue
rubber bands and step into a space composed only of
plexiglass. The clear walls rise in rows. They remind him of
the stacks in a library, or at the store, but there are no
books, only a sign mounted in the air overhead that reads:
YOU ARE THE ART

Bowls of neon paint sit out in every aisle, and sure
enough the walls are covered in markings. Signatures and
scribbles, handprints and patterns.
Some run the length of the wall, and others are nested,
like secrets, inside the larger marks. Addie dips a ﬁnger in
green paint, and brings it to the wall. She draws a spiral, a
single expanding mark. But by the time she reaches the
fourth loop, the ﬁrst has already faded, dropping away like a
pebble in deep water.
Impossible, erased.
Her face doesn’t falter, doesn’t fall, but he can see the
sadness before it drops as well, sinking out of sight.
How do you hold on? he wants to ask. Instead, he dips his
hand into the green paint, reaches past her, but he doesn’t
draw anything. Instead, he waits, hovering above the glass.

400

“Put your hand over mine,” he says, and she hesitates
only a moment before pressing her palm to the back of his
hand, ghosting her ﬁngers over his own. “There,” he says,
“now we can draw.”
She folds her hand over his, guides his index ﬁnger to the
glass, and leaves a single mark, a line of green. He can feel
the air lodge in her chest, can feel the sudden stiﬀness in
her limbs, as she waits for it to disappear.
But it doesn’t.
It stays, staring back at them in that fearless shade.
Something breaks inside her, then.
She makes a second mark, and a third, lets out a
breathless laugh, and then, her hand on his, and his on the
glass, Addie begins to draw. For the ﬁrst time in three
hundred years, she draws birds, and trees, draws a garden,
draws a workshop, draws a city, draws a pair of eyes. The
images spill out of her, and through him, and onto the wall
with a clumsy, frenzied need. And she is laughing, tears
streaming down her cheeks, and he wants to wipe them
away, but his hands are her hands, and she is drawing.
And then she dips his ﬁnger in the paint, and brings it to
the pane of glass, and this time, she writes in halting
cursive, one letter at a time.
Her name.
It sits, nested among the many drawings.
Addie LaRue
Ten letters, two words. It is no diﬀerent, he thinks, from
the hundred other marks they’ve made—but it is. He knows
it is.
Her hand drops away from his, and she reaches out, runs
her ﬁngers through the letters, and for a moment, the name
is ruined, streaks of green against the glass. But by the time
her ﬁngers fall away, it is back, unmarred, unchanged.

401

Something changes in her, then. It rolls over her, the way
storms roll over him, but this is diﬀerent, this is not dark,
but dazzling, a sudden, piercing sharpness.
And then she is pulling him away. Away from the maze,
away from the people stretched beneath the starless night,
away from the carnival of art, and the island, and he realizes
she is not pulling him away at all, but toward something.
Toward the ferry.
Toward the subway.
Toward Brooklyn.
Toward home.
The whole way, she holds tightly to Henry, their ﬁngers
intertwined, the green paint staining both their hands, as
they climb the stairs, as he opens the door, and then, she
lets go, surging past him, through the apartment. He ﬁnds
her in the bedroom, pulling a blue notebook from the shelf,
scrounging a pen from the table. She presses them both into
his hands, and Henry sinks onto the edge of the bed, folds
back the cover of the notebook, one of a dozen he’s never
used, and she kneels, breathless, beside him.
“Do it again,” she says.
And he brings the ballpoint to the blank page and writes
her name, in tight but careful script.
Addie LaRue.
It doesn’t dissolve, it doesn’t fade, it sits there, alone in
the center of the page. And Henry looks up at her, waiting
for her to go on, to dictate what comes next, and she looks
down past him, at the words.
Addie clears her throat.
“This is how it starts,” she says.
And he begins to write.

402

403

PART FIVE
THE SHADOW WHO SMILED AND
THE GIRL WHO SMILED BACK

404

Title: Ho Portado le Stelle a Letto
Artist: Matteo Renatti
Date: c. 1806–08
Medium: 20cm x 35cm pencil sketch on parchment
Location: On loan from the Gallerie dell’Accademia
Description: An illustration of a woman, the lines of her body imitated
by the twisting bedsheets. Her face is little more than angles, framed by
messy hair, but the artist has given her one very speciﬁc feature: seven
small freckles in a band across her cheeks.
Background: This drawing, found in Renatti’s 1806–8 notebook, is
thought by some to be the inspiration for his later masterpiece The
Muse. While the model’s pose and the work’s medium are diﬀerent, the
number and placement of the freckles is conspicuous enough for many
to speculate on the model’s enduring importance in Renatti’s work.
Estimated Value: $267,000

405

Villon-sur-Sarthe, France
July 29, 1764

I
Addie makes her way to the church.
It sits, near the center of Villon, squat and gray and
unchanged, the ﬁeld beside it bordered by a low stone wall.
It does not take her long to ﬁnd her father’s grave.
Jean LaRue.
Her father’s grave is spare—a name, and dates, a Bible
verse—Everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be
saved. No mention of the man her father was, no mention of
his craft, or even his kindness.
A life reduced to a block of stone, a patch of grass.
Along the way Addie had picked a handful of ﬂowers, wild
things that grow at the edge of the path, weedy blossoms,
yellow and white. She kneels to set them on the ground,
stops when she sees the dates below her father’s name.
1670–1714.
The year she left.
She searches her memory, tries to remember any signs of
sickness. The cough that lingered in his chest, the shadow
of weakness in his limbs. The memories from her second life
are trapped in amber, perfectly preserved. But the ones
from before, when she was Adeline LaRue—memories of
kneading bread on a stool beside her mother, of watching
her father carve faces into blocks of wood, of trailing Estele
through the shallows of the Sarthe—those are fading. The

406

twenty-three years she lived before the woods, before the
deal, worn to little more than edges.
Later, Addie will be able to recall almost three hundred
years in perfect detail, every moment of every day,
preserved.
But she is already losing the sound of her father’s laugh.
She cannot remember the exact color of her mother’s
eyes.
Cannot recall the set of Estele’s jaw.
For years, she will lie awake and tell herself stories of the
girl she’d been, in hopes of holding fast to every ﬂeeting
fragment, but it will have the opposite eﬀect—the memories
like talismans, too often touched; like saint’s coins, the
etching worn down to silver plate and faint impressions.
As for her father’s sickness, it must have stolen in
between one season and the next, and for the ﬁrst time,
Addie is grateful for the cleansing nature of her curse, for
having made the deal at all—not for her own sake, but for
her mother’s. That Marthe LaRue had only to grieve one
loss, instead of two.
Jean is buried among the other members of their family.
An infant sister who only saw two years. A mother and
father, both gone before Addie herself was ten. One row
over, their own parents and unmarried siblings. The plot
beside him, empty, and waiting for his wife.
There is no place for her, of course. But this string of
graves, like a timeline, charting from the past into the
future, this is what drove her to the woods that night, the
fear of a life like this, leading to the same small patch of
grass.
Staring down at her father’s grave, Addie feels the heavy
sadness of ﬁnality, the weight of an object coming to rest.
The grief has come and gone—she lost this man ﬁfty years
ago, she has already mourned, and though it hurts, the pain

407

isn’t fresh. It has long dulled to an ache, the wound given
way to scar.
She lays the ﬂowers on her father’s grave, and rises,
moving deeper between the plots, drawn back in time with
every step, until she is no longer Addie, but Adeline; no
longer a ghost but ﬂesh and blood and mortal. Still bound to
this place, roots aching like phantom limbs.
She studies the names on the gravestones, knows each
and every one, but the diﬀerence is that once upon a time,
the names knew her, too.
Here is Roger, buried beside his ﬁrst and only wife,
Pauline.
Here is Isabelle, and her youngest, Sara, taken in the
same year.
And here, almost in the center of the yard, is the name
that matters most. The one that held her hand so many
times, showed her there was more to life.
Estele Magritte, reads her tombstone. 1642–1719.
The dates are carved over a simple cross, and Addie can
almost hear the old woman hissing through her teeth.
Estele, buried in the shadow of a house she did not
worship.
Estele, who would say that a soul is just the seed returned
to soil, who wanted nothing but a tree over her bones. She
should have been laid to rest at the edge of the woods, or
amid the vegetables in her garden. She should have at least
been buried in a corner plot, where the branches of an old
yew reach over the low wall to shade the graves.
Addie crosses to the small shed at the edge of the
churchyard, and ﬁnds a trowel amid the tools, and sets oﬀ
for the woods.
It is the height of summer, but the air is cool beneath the
cover of the trees. Midday, but still the smell of night lingers
on the leaves. The scent of this place, so universal, and

408

speciﬁc. With every breath the taste of soil on her tongue,
the memory of desperation, a girl, sinking her hands into
the dirt as she prayed.
Now, she sinks the trowel instead, coaxes a sapling from
the soil. It is a fragile thing, likely to fall over with the next
strong storm, but she carries it back to the churchyard,
cradled like an infant in her hands, and if anyone ﬁnds it
strange, they will forget about the sight long before they
think to tell anyone. And if they notice the tree growing over
the old woman’s grave, perhaps they will stop and think of
older gods again.
And as Addie leaves the church behind, the bells begin to
chime, calling the villagers to Mass.
She walks down the road as they pour from their homes,
children clinging to their mother’s hands, and men and
women side by side. Some faces new to her, and others, she
knows.
There is George Therault, and Roger’s oldest daughter,
and Isabelle’s two sons, and the next time Addie comes,
they will all be dead, the last of her old life—her ﬁrst life—
buried in the same ten-meter plot.

The hut sits abandoned at the edge of the woods.
The low fence has fallen in, and Estele’s garden is long
overgrown, the house itself slowly giving way, sagging with
age and neglect. The door is shut fast, but the shutters hang
on broken joints, exposing the glass of a single window,
cracked open like a tired eye.
The next time Addie comes, the frame of the house will
be lost beneath the green, and the time after that, the
woods will have crept forward and swallowed it all.
But today, it still stands, and she makes her way up the
weedy path, the stolen lantern in one hand. She keeps
409

expecting the old woman to step out of the woods, wrinkled
arms ﬁlled with cuttings, but the only rustle comes from
magpies and the sound of her own feet.
Inside, the hut is damp, and empty, the dark space
littered with debris—the clay shards of a broken cup, a
crumbling table—but gone are the bowls in which she mixed
her salves, and the cane she used when the weather was
wet, and the bundles of herbs that hung from the rafters,
and the iron pot that sat in the hearth.
Addie is sure that Estele’s things were taken up after her
death, parceled out through the village, just as her life was,
deemed public property simply because she did not wed.
Villon, her ward, because Estele had no child.
She goes into the garden, and harvests what she can
from the wild plot, carries the ragged bounty of carrots and
long beans inside and sets it on the table. She throws the
shutters open and ﬁnds herself face-to-face with the woods.
The trees stand in a dark line, tangled branches clawing
at the sky. Their roots are inching forward, crawling into the
garden and across the lawn. A slow and patient advance.
The sun is sinking now, and even though it’s summer, a
damp has crawled in through the gaps in the thatched roof,
between the stones and under the door, and a chill hangs
over the bones of the little hut.
Addie carries a stolen lantern to the hearth. It has been a
rainy month, and the wood is damp, but she is patient,
coaxing the ﬂame from the lamp until it catches on the
kindling.
Fifty years, and she is still learning the shape of her curse.
She cannot make a thing, but she can use it.
She cannot break a thing, but she can steal it.
She cannot start a ﬁre, but she can keep it going.
She does not know if it’s some kind of mercy, or simply a
crack in the mortar of her curse, one of the few ﬁssures

410

she’s found in the walls of this new life. Perhaps Luc hasn’t
noticed. Or perhaps he has put them there on purpose, to
draw her out, to make her hope.
Addie draws a smoldering twig from the ﬁreplace and
brings it idly to the threadbare rug. It is dry enough that it
should catch, and burn, but it does not. It gutters, and cools
too quickly, just outside the safety of its hearth.
She sits on the ﬂoor, humming softly as she feeds stick
after stick into the blaze until it burns the chill oﬀ the place
like a breath scattering dust.
She feels him like a draft.
He does not knock.
He never knocks.
One moment she is alone, and the next, she is not.
“Adeline.”
She hates the way it makes her feel to hear him say her
name, hates the way she leans into the word like a body
seeking shelter from a storm.
“Luc.”
She turns, expecting to see him as he was in Paris,
dressed in the ﬁne salon fashion, but instead he is exactly
as he was the night they met, wind-blown and shadowedged, in a simple dark tunic, the laces open at the collar.
The ﬁrelight dances across his face, shades the edges of his
jaw and cheek and brow like charcoal.
His eyes slide over the meager bounty on the sill before
returning to her. “Back where you started…”
Addie rises to her feet, so he can’t look down on her.
“Fifty years,” he says. “How quickly they go by.”
They have not gone quickly at all, not for her, and he
knows it. He is looking for bare skin, soft places to slide the
knife, but she will not give him such an easy target. “No
time at all,” she echoes coolly. “To think one life would ever
be enough.”

411

Luc ﬂashes only the edge of a smile.
“What a picture you make, tending that ﬁre. You could
almost be Estele.”
It is the ﬁrst time she has heard that name on his lips,
and there is something in the way he says it, almost wistful.
Luc crosses to the window, and looks out at the line of trees.
“How many nights she stood here, and whispered out into
the woods.”
He glances over his shoulder, a coy grin playing over his
lips. “For all her talk of freedom, she was so lonely in the
end.”
Addie shakes her head. “No.”
“You should have been here with her,” he says. “Should
have eased her pain when she was ill. Should have laid her
down to rest. You owed her that.”
Addie draws back as if struck.
“You were so selﬁsh, Adeline. And because of you, she
died alone.”
We all die alone. That is what Estele would say—at least,
she thinks. She hopes. Once, she would have been certain,
but the conﬁdence has faded with the memory of the
woman’s voice.
Across the room, the darkness moves. One moment he is
at the window, the next, he is behind her, his voice
threading through her hair.
“She was so ready to die,” Luc says. “So desperate for
that spot in the shade. She stood at that window and
begged, and begged. I could have given it to her.”
A memory, old ﬁngers tight around her wrist.
Never pray to the gods that answer after dark.
Addie turns on him. “She would never have prayed to
you.”
A ﬂickering smile. “No.” A sneer. “But think of how sad
she’d be to know you did.”

412

Addie’s temper ﬂares. Her hand ﬂies out before she thinks
to stop it, and even then, she half expects to ﬁnd no
purchase, only air and smoke. But Luc is caught oﬀ guard,
and so her palm strikes skin, or something like it. His head
turns a fraction with the force of the blow. There is no blood
on those perfect lips, of course, no heat on that cool skin,
but she has at least wiped the smile from his face.
Or so she thinks.
Until he begins to laugh.
The sound is eerie, unreal, and when he turns his face
back toward her, she stills. There is nothing human in it now.
The bones are too sharp, the shadows too deep, the eyes
too bright.
“You forget yourself,” he says, his voice dissolving into
woodsmoke. “You forget me.”
Pain lances up through Addie’s feet, sudden and sharp.
She looks down, searching for a wound, but the pain lights
her from within. A deep, internal ache, the force of every
step she’s ever walked.
“Perhaps I have been too merciful.”
The pain climbs through her limbs, infecting knee and hip,
wrist and shoulder. Her legs buckle beneath her, and it is all
she can do not to scream.
The darkness looks down with a smile.
“I have made this too easy.”
Addie watches in horror as her hands begin to wrinkle and
thin, blue veins standing out beneath papery skin.
“You asked only for life. I gave you your health, and
youth, as well.”
Her hair comes loose from its bun and hangs lank before
her eyes, the strands going dry and brittle and gray.
“It has made you arrogant.”
Her sight weakens, vision blurring until the room is only
smudges and vague shapes.

413

“Perhaps you need to suﬀer.”
Addie squeezes her eyes shut, heart ﬂuttering with panic.
“No,” she says, and it is the closest she has ever come to
pleading.
She can feel him, moving closer. Can feel the shadow of
him looming over her.
“I will take away these pains. I will let you rest. I will even
raise a tree over your bones. And all you have to do”—the
voice seeps through the dark—“is surrender.”
That word, like a tear in the veil. And for all the pain, and
terror, of this moment, Addie knows she will not give in.
She has survived worse. She will survive worse. This is
nothing but a god’s foul temper.
When she ﬁnds the breath to speak, the words come out
in a ragged whisper. “Go to Hell.”
She braces herself, wonders if he will rot her all the way
through, bend her body into a corpse, and leave her there, a
broken husk on the old woman’s ﬂoor. But there is only
more laughter, low and rumbling, and then nothing, the
night stretching into stillness.
Addie is afraid to open her eyes, but when she does, she
ﬁnds herself alone.
The ache has faded from her bones. Her loose hair has
regained its chestnut shade. Her hands, once ruined, are
again young, smooth, and strong.
She rises, shaking, and turns toward the hearth.
But the ﬁre, so carefully tended, has gone out.
That night, Addie curls up on the moldering pallet,
beneath a threadbare blanket left unclaimed, and thinks of
Estele.
She closes her eyes and inhales until she can almost
smell the herbs that clung to the old woman’s hair, the
garden and sap on her skin. She holds fast to the memory of
Estele’s crooked smile, her crow-like laugh, the voice she

414

used when she spoke to gods, and the one she used with
Addie. Back when she was young, when Estele taught her
not to be afraid of storms, of shadows, of sounds in the
night.

415

New York City
March 19, 2014

II
Addie leans against the window, watching the sun rise over
Brooklyn.
She wraps her ﬁngers around a cup of tea, savoring the
heat against her palms. The glass fogs with cold, the dregs
of winter clinging to the edges of the day. She is wearing
one of Henry’s sweatshirts, cotton branded with the
Columbia logo. It smells like him. Like old books and fresh
coﬀee.
She pads barefoot back into the bedroom, where Henry
lies facedown, arms folded beneath the pillow, his cheek
turned away. And in that moment, he looks so much like
Luc, and yet nothing like Luc at all. The resemblance
between them wavers, like double vision. His curls, spread
like black feathers on the white pillow, fading to downy ﬂuﬀ
at the nape of his neck. His back rises and falls, steady with
the smooth, shallow tread of sleep.
Addie sets the cup down on the bedside table, between
Henry’s glasses and a leather watch. She traces her ﬁnger
along the dark metal rim, the gold numerals set into the
black ground. It rocks under her touch, reveals the small
inscription on the back.
Live well.
A small shiver runs through her, and she’s about to pick it
up when Henry groans into his pillow, a soft protest to

416

morning.
Addie abandons the watch, and climbs back into bed
beside him. “Hello.”
He gropes for his glasses, puts them on, and looks at her,
and smiles, and this is the part that will never get old. The
knowing. The present folding on top of the past instead of
erasing it, replacing it. He pulls her back against him.
“Hello,” he whispers into her hair. “What time is it?”
“Almost eight.”
Henry groans, and tightens his grip around her. He is
warm, and Addie wishes aloud they could stay there all day.
But he is awake now, that restless energy winding around
him like rope. She can feel it in the tension of his arms, the
subtle shifting of his weight.
“I should go,” she says, because she assumes that is
what you are supposed to say when you are in someone
else’s bed. When they remember how you got there. But
she doesn’t say “I should go home” and Henry senses the
dropped word.
“Where do you live?” he asks.
Nowhere, she thinks. Everywhere.
“I manage. The city is full of beds.”
“But you don’t have a place of your own.”
Addie looks down at the borrowed sweatshirt, the sum
total of her current possessions ﬂung over the nearest chair.
“No.”
“Then you can stay here.”
“Three dates, and you’re asking me to move in?”
Henry laughs, because of course it is absurd. But it is
hardly the strangest thing in either of their lives.
“How about I ask you to stay—for now.”
Addie doesn’t know what to say. And before she can think
of something, he is out of bed, pulling open the bottom

417

drawer. He pushes the contents to one side, carving out
space. “You can put your stuﬀ here.”
He looks at her, suddenly uncertain. “Do you have
things?”
She will explain, eventually, the details of her curse, the
way it twists and curls around her. But he doesn’t know
them yet—doesn’t need to. For him, her story has just
started.
“There’s no point really, in having more than you can
hold, when you have no place to put things down.”
“Well, if you get things—if you want them—you can put
them there.”
With that, he heads sleepily for the shower, and she
stares at the space he’s made for her, and wonders what
would happen if she had things to put inside. Would they
disappear immediately? Go slowly, carelessly missing, like
socks stolen by a dryer? She has never been able to hang
on to anything for long. Only the leather jacket, and the
wooden ring, and she’s always known it is because Luc
wanted her to have both—had bound them to her under the
guise of gifts.
She turns and studies the clothes ﬂung over the chair.
They are streaked with paint from the High Line. There’s
green on her shirt, a purple smear on the knee of her jeans.
Her boots, too, are ﬂecked with yellow and blue. She knows
the paint will fade, rinsed oﬀ by a puddle, or simply wiped
away by time, but that’s how memories are supposed to
work.
There—and then, little by little, gone.
She gets dressed in yesterday’s outﬁt, takes up the
leather jacket, but instead of shrugging it on, she folds it
carefully, places it in the empty drawer. It sits there,
surrounded by open space, waiting to be ﬁlled.
Addie rounds the bed, and nearly steps on the notebook.

418

It lies open on the ﬂoor—it must have slipped oﬀ the bed
during the night—and she lifts it gingerly, as if it’s bound
with ash and spider silk instead of paper and glue. She half
expects it to crumble at her touch, but it holds, and when
she chances to pull back the cover, she ﬁnds the ﬁrst few
pages ﬁlled. Addie takes another chance, runs her ﬁngers
lightly over the words, feels the indent of the pen, the years
hidden behind each word.
This is how it starts, he wrote under her name.
The ﬁrst thing she still remembers is the ride to market.
Her father in the seat beside her, cart ﬁlled with his work …
She holds her breath as she reads, the shower ﬁlling the
room with a quiet hush.
Her father tells her stories. She doesn’t remember the
words but she remembers the way he said them …
Addie perches there, reading until she runs out of words,
the script giving way to page after page of empty space,
waiting to be ﬁlled.
When she hears Henry turn the water oﬀ, she forces
herself to close the book, and sets it gently, almost
reverently, back on the bed.

419

Fécamp, France
July 29, 1778

III
To think, she could have lived and died and never seen the
sea.
No matter, though. Addie is here now, pale cliﬀs rising to
her right, stone sentinels at the edge of the beach where
she sits, skirts pooling on the sand. She stares out at the
expanse, the coastline giving way to water, and water
giving way to sky. She has seen maps of course, but ink and
paper hold nothing to this. To the salt smell, the murmur of
waves, the hypnotic draw of the tide. To the scope and scale
of the sea, and the knowledge that somewhere, beyond the
horizon, there is more.
It will be a century before she crosses the Atlantic, and
when she does, she’ll wonder if the maps are wrong, will
begin to doubt the existence of land at all—but here and
now, Addie is simply enchanted.
Once upon a time, her world was only as large as a small
village in the middle of France. But it keeps getting bigger.
The map of her life unfurls, revealing hills and valleys, towns
and cities and seas. Revealing Le Mans. Revealing Paris.
Revealing this.
She has been in Fécamp for nearly a week, spending her
days between the pier and the tide, and if anyone takes
notice of the strange woman alone on the sand, they have
not seen ﬁt to bother her about it. Addie watches boats

420

come and go, and wonders where they are going; wonders,
too, what would happen if she boarded one, where it would
take her. Back in Paris, the food shortages are getting
worse, the penalties, worse, everything steadily worse. The
tension has spilled out of the city, too, the nervous energy
reaching all the way here, to the coast. All the more reason,
Addie tells herself, to sail away.
And yet.
Something always holds her back.
Today, it is the storm that’s rolling in. It hovers out over
the sea, bruising the sky. Here and there the sun splits
through, a line of burned light falling toward the slate gray
water. She retrieves the book, lying in the sand beside her,
begins to read again.
Our revels now are ended. These our actors,
As I foretold you, were all spirits and
Are melted into air, into thin air:
It is Shakespeare’s Tempest. Now and then she trips over
the playwright’s cadence, the style strange, English rhyme
and meter still foreign to her mind. But she is learning, and
here and there she ﬁnds herself falling into the ﬂow.
And, like the baseless fabric of this vision,
The cloud-capp’d towers, the gorgeous palaces,
The solemn temples, the great globe itself …
Her eyes begin to strain against the failing light.
Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve
And, like this insubstantial pageant faded,
Leave not a rack behind—
“‘We are such stuﬀ as dreams are made on,’” comes a
now familiar voice behind her. “‘And our little life is rounded

421

with a sleep.’” A soft sound, like breathless laughter. “Well,
not all lives.”
Luc looms over her like a shadow.
She has not forgiven him for the violence of that night
back in Villon. Braces for it even now, though they have
seen each other several times in the intervening years,
forged a wary kind of truce.
But she knows better than to trust it as he sinks onto the
sand beside her, one arm draped lazily over his knee, the
picture of languid grace, even here. “I was there, you know,
when he wrote that verse.”
“Shakespeare?” She cannot hide her surprise.
“Who do you think he called on in the dead of night, when
the words would not come?”
“You lie.”
“I boast,” he says. “They are not the same. Our William
sought a patron, and I obliged.”
The storm is rolling in, a curtain of rain sliding toward the
coast. “Is that really how you see yourself?” she asks,
tapping sand from her book. “As some splendid benefactor?”
“Do not sulk, simply because you chose poorly.”
“Did I though?” she counters. “After all, I am free.”
“And forgotten.”
But she is ready for the barb. “Most things are.” Addie
looks out to sea.
“Adeline,” he scolds, “what a stubborn thing you are. And
yet, it has not even been a hundred years. I wonder, then,
how you will feel after a hundred more.”
“I don’t know,” she says blandly. “I suppose you’ll have to
ask me then.”
The storm reaches the coast. The ﬁrst drops begin to fall,
and Addie presses the book to her chest, shielding the
pages from the damp.

422

Luc rises. “Walk with me,” he says, holding out his hand.
It is not an invitation so much as a command, but the rain is
quickly turning from a promise to a steady pour, and she
has only the one dress. She rises without his help, brushing
the sand from her skirts.
“This way.”
He leads her through town, toward the silhouette of a
building, its vaulted steeple piercing the low clouds. It is, of
all things, a church.
“You’re joking.”
“I am not the one getting wet,” he says. And indeed, he’s
not. She is soaked through by the time they reach the
shelter of the stone awning, but Luc is dry. The rain has not
even touched him.
He smiles, reaching for the door.
It does not matter that the church is locked. Were it
draped in chains, it would still open for him. Such
boundaries, she has learned, mean nothing to the dark.
Inside, the air is stuﬀy, the stone walls holding in the
summer heat. It is too dark to see more than the outlines of
the pews, the ﬁgure on its cross.
Luc spreads his arms. “Behold, the house of God.”
His voice echoes through the chamber, soft and sinister.
Addie has always wondered if Luc could set foot on sacred
ground, but the sound of his shoes on the church ﬂoor is
answer to that question.
She makes her way down the aisle, but she cannot shake
the strangeness of this place. Without the bells, the organ,
the bodies crowding in for services, the church feels
abandoned. Less a house of worship and more a tomb.
“Care to confess your sins?”
Luc has moved with all the ease of shadows in the dark.
He is no longer behind her, but sitting in the ﬁrst row now,

423

his arms spread along the back of the pew, his legs thrown
out, ankles crossed in lazy repose.
Addie was raised to kneel in the little stone chapel in the
center of Villon, spent days folded into Paris pews. She has
listened to the bells, and the organ, and the calls to prayer.
And yet, despite it all, she has never understood the appeal.
How does a ceiling bring you closer to heaven? If God is so
large, why build walls to hold Him in?
“My parents were believers,” she muses, her ﬁngers
trailing over the pews. “They always spoke of God. Of His
strength, His mercy, His light. They said He was everywhere,
in everything.” Addie stops before the altar. “They believed
in everything so easily.”
“And you?”
Addie looks up at the panels of stained glass, the images
little more than ghosts without the sun to light them. She
wanted to believe. She listened, and waited to hear His
voice, to feel His presence, the way she might feel sun on
her shoulders, or wheat beneath her hands. The way she
felt the presence of the old gods Estele so favored. But
there, in the cold stone house, she never felt anything.
She shakes her head, and says aloud, “I never understood
why I should believe in something I could not feel, or hear,
or see.”
Luc raises a brow. “I think,” he says, “they call that faith.”
“Says the devil in the house of God.” Addie glances his
way as she says it, and catches a brief ﬂash of yellow across
the steady green.
“A house is a house,” he says, annoyed. “This one
belongs to all, or none. And you think me the devil, now?
You weren’t so certain in the woods.”
“Perhaps,” she says, “you have made me a believer.”
Luc tips his head back, a wicked smile tugging at his
mouth. “And you think if I am real, then so is he. The light to

424

my shadow, the day to my dark? And you are convinced, if
only you had prayed to him instead of me, he would have
shown you such kindness and such mercy.”
She has wondered as much a hundred times, though of
course she does not say it.
Luc’s hands slide oﬀ the pew as he leans forward.
“And now,” he adds, “you will never know. But as for me,”
he says, rising, “well—the devil is simply a new word for a
very old idea. And as for God, well, if all it takes is a ﬂair for
drama and a bit of golden trim…”
He ﬂicks his ﬁngers, and suddenly the buttons on his
coat, the buckles on his shoes, the stitching on his waistcoat
are no longer black, but gilded. Burnished stars against a
moonless night.
He smiles, then brushes the ﬁligree away like dust.
She watches it fall, looks up again to ﬁnd him there,
inches from her face.
“But this is the diﬀerence between us, Adeline,” he
whispers, ﬁngers grazing her chin. “I will always answer.”
She shivers, despite herself. At the too-familiar touch
against her skin, at the lurid green of his eyes, at the
wolﬁsh, wild grin.
“Besides,” he says, ﬁngers falling from her face, “all gods
have a price. I’m hardly the only one who trades in souls.”
Luc holds his hand, open, to one side, and light blooms in
the air just above his palm. “He lets souls wither on shelves.
I water them.”
The light warps and coils.
“He makes promises. I pay up front.”
It ﬂares once, sudden and brilliant, and then draws close,
taking on a solid shape.
Addie has always wondered what a soul would look like.
It is such a grand word, soul. Like god, like time, like
space, and when she’s tried to picture it, she’s conjured

425

images of lightning, or sunbeams through dust, of storms in
the shapes of human forms, of vast and edgeless white.
The truth is so much smaller.
The light in Luc’s hand is a marble, glassy and glowing
with a faint internal light.
“Is that all?”
And yet, Addie cannot tear her gaze from the fragile orb.
She feels herself reaching for it, but he draws it back, out of
her reach.
“Do not be deceived by its appearance.” He turns the
glowing bead between his ﬁngers. “You look at me and see
a man, though you know I am nothing of the sort. This
shape is only an aspect, designed for the beholder.”
The light twists, and shifts, the orb ﬂattening into a disk.
And then a ring. Her ring. The ash wood glows, and her
heart aches to see it, to hold it, to feel the worn surface
against her skin. But she clenches her hands into ﬁsts to
keep from reaching out again.
“What does it really look like?”
“I can show you,” he purrs, letting the light settle in his
palm. “Say the word, and I will lay your own soul bare
before you. Surrender, and I promise, the last thing you see
will be the truth.”
There it is again.
One time salt, and the next honey, and each designed to
cover poison.
Addie looks at the ring, lets herself linger on it one last
time, and then forces her gaze up past the light to meet the
dark.
“You know,” she says, “I think I’d rather live and wonder.”
Luc’s mouth twitches, and she cannot tell if it is anger or
amusement.
“Suit yourself, my dear,” he says, dousing the light
between his ﬁngers.

426

New York City
March 23, 2014

IV
Addie sits folded in a leather chair in the corner of The Last
Word, the soft purr of the cat emanating from the shelves
somewhere behind her head, as she watches customers
lean toward Henry like ﬂowers toward the sun.
Once you know about a thing, you start to see it
everywhere.
Someone says the words purple elephant, and all of a
sudden, you catch sight of them in shop windows and on Tshirts, stuﬀed animals and billboards, and you wonder how
you never noticed.
It is the same with Henry, and the deal he made.
A man, laughing at everything he says.
A woman beams, radiant with joy.
A teenage girl steals chances to touch his shoulder, his
arm, blushing with blatant attraction.
Despite it all, Addie is not jealous.
She has lived too long and lost too much, and what little
she’s had has been borrowed or stolen, never kept to
herself. She has learned to share—and yet, every time
Henry steals a glance her way, she feels a pleasant ﬂush of
warmth, as welcome as the sudden appearance of sunlight
between clouds.
Addie draws her legs up into the chair, a book of poems
open in her lap.

427

She’s swapped the paint-spattered clothes for a new pair
of black jeans, and an oversized sweater, lifted from a thrift
store while Henry was working. But she kept the boots, the
little ﬂecks of yellow and blue a reminder of the night
before, the closest thing she has to a photo, a material
memory. “Ready?”
She looks up, sees the shop sign already turned outwardly
to CLOSED, and Henry standing near the door, his jacket slung
over his arm. He holds out his hand, helps her from the
leather chair, which, he explains, has a way of eating
people.
They step outside, climb the four steps back to the street.
“Where to?” asks Addie.
It is early, and Henry’s buzzing with a restless energy. It
seems to worsen around dusk, sunset a steady marker of
one day gone, time passing with the loss of light.
“Have you been to the Ice Cream Factory?”
“That sounds like fun.”
His face falls. “You’ve already been.”
“I don’t mind going again.”
But Henry shakes his head, and says, “I want to show you
something new. Is there anywhere you haven’t been?” he
asks, and after a long moment, Addie shrugs.
“I’m sure there is,” she says. “But I haven’t found it yet.”
She meant it to be funny, light, but Henry frowns, deep in
thought, and looks around.
“Okay,” he says, grabbing her hand. “Come with me.”
An hour later, they are standing in Grand Central.
“I hate to break it to you,” she says, looking around at the
bustling station, “but I’ve been here before. Most people
have.”
But Henry shoots her a grin that’s pure mischief. “This
way.”

428

She follows him down the escalator to the station’s lower
level. They weave, hand in hand, through a steady sea of
evening travelers, toward the bustling food hall, but Henry
stops short, beneath an intersection of tile arches, corridors
branching every direction. He draws her into one of the
pillared corners, where the arches split, curving overhead
and across, turns her toward the tiled wall.
“Stay here,” he says, and starts to walk away.
“Where are you going?” she asks, already turning to
follow.
But Henry returns, squaring her shoulders to the arch.
“Stay here, like this,” he says. “And listen.”
Addie turns her ear to the tile wall, but she can’t hear
anything over the shuﬄe of foot traﬃc, the clatter and rattle
of the evening crowd. She glances over her shoulder.
“Henry, I don’t—”
But Henry isn’t there. He’s jogging across the hall to the
opposite side of the arch, maybe thirty feet away. He looks
back at her, and then turns away and buries his face in the
corner, looking for all the world like a kid playing hide-andseek, counting to ten.
Addie feels ridiculous, but she leans in close to the tiled
wall, and waits, and listens.
And then, impossibly, she hears his voice.
“Addie.”
She startles. The word is soft but clear, as if he’s standing
right beside her.
“How are you doing this?” she asks the arch. And she can
hear the smile in his voice when he answers.
“The sound follows the curve of the arch. A phenomenon
that happens when spaces bend just right. It’s called a
whispering gallery.”
Addie marvels. Three hundred years, and there are still
new things to learn.

429

“Talk to me,” comes the voice against the tile.
“What should I say?” she whispers to the wall.
“Well,” says Henry, softly, in her ear. “Why don’t you tell
me a story?”

430

Paris, France
July 29, 1789

V
Paris is burning.
Outside, the air reeks of gunpowder and smoke, and while
the city has never been truly quiet, for the last fortnight the
noise has been ceaseless. It is musket rounds, and cannon
ﬁre, it is soldiers shouting orders, and the retort carried from
mouth to mouth.
Vive la France. Vive la France. Vive la France.
Two weeks since the taking of the Bastille, and the city
seems determined to tear itself in two. And yet, it must go
on, it must survive, and all those in it, left to ﬁnd a way
through the daily storm.
Addie has chosen to move at night instead.
She weaves through the dark, a saber jostling at her hip
and a tricorne low over her brow. The clothes she peeled
from a man who had been shot in the street, the torn cloth
and dark stain on the stomach hidden beneath a vest that
she salvaged from another corpse. Beggars can’t be
choosers, and it is too dangerous to travel as a woman
alone. Worse still these days to play the part of noble—
better to blend in in other ways.
A current has swept through the city, at once triumphant
and intoxicating, and in time, Addie will learn to taste the
changes in the air, to sense the line between vigor and

431

violence. But tonight, the rebellion is still new, the energy
strange and unreadable.
As for the city itself, the avenues of Paris have all become
a maze, the sudden erection of barriers and barricades
turning any path into a series of dead ends. It is no surprise
then when she rounds another corner and ﬁnds a pile of
crates and debris burning up ahead.
Addie swears under her breath, is about to double back,
when boots sound on the road behind her and a gun goes
oﬀ, cracking against the barricade above her head.
She turns to ﬁnd half a dozen men barring her retreat,
dressed in the mottled garb of the rebellion. Their muskets
and sabers glint dully in the evening light. She is grateful,
then, that her clothes belonged once to a commoner.
Addie clears her throat, careful to force her voice deep,
gruﬀ as she calls out, “Vive la France!”
The men return the cheer, but to her dismay, they don’t
retreat. Instead, they continue toward her, hands resting on
their weapons. In the light of the blaze, their eyes are glassy
with wine, and the nameless energy of the night.
“What are you doing here?” demands one.
“Could be a spy,” says another. “Plenty of soldiers
parading about in common dress. Robbing the bodies of the
valiant dead.”
“I want no trouble,” she calls out. “I am simply lost. Let
me pass, and I will be gone.”
“And return with a dozen more,” mutters the second.
“I am not a spy, nor a soldier, nor a corpse,” she calls
back. “I was only looking—”
“—to sabotage,” cuts in a third.
“Or raid our stores,” suggests another.
They are no longer shouting. There is no need. They have
drawn close enough to speak in level tones, pressing her
back against the burning barricade. If she can only get past

432

them, get away, out of sight and out of mind—but there is
nowhere to run. The side streets have all been barred. The
crates burn hot behind her.
“If you are a friend, then prove it.”
“Lay down your sword.”
“Take oﬀ your hat. Let us see your face.”
Addie swallows, and casts the hat aside, hoping the dark
will be enough to hide the softness of her features. But just
then, the barricade crackles behind her, some beam giving
way to ﬂame, and for an instant, the ﬁre brightens, and she
knows the light is strong enough to see by. Knows it by the
way their faces change.
“Let me pass,” she says again, hand going to the sword at
her hip. She knows how to wield it, knows too that there are
ﬁve of them and only one of her, and if she draws steel,
there will be no way out of this but through. The promise of
survival is small comfort against the prospect of what might
happen ﬁrst.
They close in, and Addie draws the sword.
“Stay back,” she growls.
And to her surprise, the men stop walking. Their steps
drag to a halt, and a shadow falls across their faces, the
expressions going slack. Hands slip from weapons, and
heads loll on shoulders, and the night goes still, save for the
crackle of the burning crates and the breezy arrival of a
voice at her back.
“Humans are so ill-equipped for peace.”
She turns, her sword still raised, and ﬁnds Luc, his edges
black against the blaze. He doesn’t retreat from the sword,
simply reaches up and runs his hand along the steel with all
the grace of a lover touching skin, a musician fondling an
instrument. She half expects the blade to sing beneath his
ﬁngers.

433

“My Adeline,” says the darkness, “you do have a way of
ﬁnding trouble.” That vivid green gaze drifts to the
motionless men. “How lucky I was here.”
“You are the night itself,” she parrots. “Shouldn’t you be
everywhere?”
A smile ﬂickers across his face. “What a good memory
you have.” His ﬁngers curl around her blade, and it begins
to rust. “How tiresome that must be.”
“Not at all,” she says dryly. “It is a gift. Think of all there is
to learn. And I, with all the time to learn i—”
She is interrupted by a volley of gunﬁre in the distance,
the answer of a cannon, heavy as thunder. Luc frowns in
distaste, and it amuses her to see him unsettled. The
cannon sounds again, and he takes her by the wrist.
“Come,” he says, “I cannot hear myself think.”
He turns swiftly on his heel, and draws her in his wake.
But instead of stepping forward, he steps sideways, into the
deep shadow of the nearest wall. Addie ﬂinches back,
expecting to strike stone, but the wall opens, and the world
gives way, and before she can draw breath, draw back, Paris
is gone, and so is Luc.
As she is plunged into absolute darkness.
It is not as still as death, not as empty, or calm. There is a
violence to this blind black void. It is birds’ wings beating
against her skin. It is the rush of the wind in her hair. It is a
thousand whispering voices. It is fear, and falling, and it is a
feral, wild feeling, and by the time she thinks to scream, the
darkness has peeled away again, the night has re-formed,
and Luc is once again beside her.
Addie sways, braces herself against a doorway, feeling ill,
and empty, and confused.
“What was that?” she asks, but Luc does not answer. He
is now standing several feet away, hands splayed on the
railing of a bridge as he looks out over the river.

434

But it is not the Seine.
There are no burning barricades. There is no cannon ﬁre.
No men waiting, weapons at their sides. Only a foreign river
running beneath a foreign bridge, and foreign buildings
rising along foreign banks, their rooftops capped in red tiles.
“That’s better,” he says, adjusting his cuﬀs. Somehow, in
the moment of nothing, he has changed clothes, the collar
higher now, the cut and trim a looser silk, while Addie wears
the same ill-ﬁtted tunic, salvaged from a Paris street.
A couple passes arm in arm, and she catches only the
highs and lows of a foreign tongue.
“Where are we?” she demands.
Luc glances over his shoulder, and says something in the
same choppy ﬂow before repeating himself in French. “We
are in Florence.”
Florence. She has heard the name before, but knows little
of it, besides the obvious—that it is not in France but Italy.
“What have you done?” she demands. “How have you—
No, never mind. Just take me back.”
He arches a brow. “Adeline, for someone with nothing but
time, you are always in a hurry.” And with that, he ambles
away, and Addie is left to follow in his wake.
She takes in the strangeness of the new city. Florence is
all odd shapes and sharp edges, domes and spires, white
stone walls and copper-slated roofs. It is a place painted in a
diﬀerent palette, music played in a diﬀerent chord. Her
heart ﬂutters at the beauty of it, and Luc smiles as if he can
sense her pleasure.
“You would rather the burning streets of Paris?”
“I assumed you would be fond of war.”
“That isn’t war,” he says curtly. “It’s only a skirmish.”
She follows him into an open courtyard, a plaza scattered
with stone benches, the air heavy with the scent of summer
blossoms. He walks ahead, the picture of a gentleman

435

taking the night air, slowing only when he sees a man, a
bottle of wine beneath one arm. He curls his ﬁngers, and the
man changes course, coming like a dog to heel. Luc slides
into that other tongue, a language she will come to know as
Florentine, and though she does not yet know the words,
she knows the lure in his voice, that gauzy sheen that takes
shape in the air around them. Knows, too, the dreamy look
in the Italian’s eyes as he hands over the wine with a placid
smile, and strolls absently away.
Luc sinks onto a bench, and draws two glasses out of
nothing.
Addie does not sit. She stands, and watches as he
uncorks the bottle and pours the wine, and says, “Why
would I be fond of war?”
It is the ﬁrst time, she thinks, he has asked an honest
question, one not meant to goad, demand, coerce. “Are you
not a god of chaos?”
His expression sours. “I am a god of promise, Adeline, and
wars make terrible patrons.” He oﬀers her a glass, and when
she does not reach to take it, he lifts, as if to toast her. “To
long life.”
Addie cannot help herself. She shakes her head,
bemused. “Some nights, you love to see me suﬀer, so that I
will yield. Others, you seem intent to spare me from it. I do
wish you’d make up your mind.”
A shadow sweeps across his face. “Trust me, my dear,
you don’t.” A small shiver runs through her as he lifts the
wineglass to his lips. “Do not mistake this—any of it—for
kindness, Adeline.” His eyes go bright with mischief. “I
simply want to be the one who breaks you.”
She looks around at the tree-lined plaza, lit by lanterns,
the moonlight shining on the red-capped roofs. “Well, you’ll
have to try harder than…”

436

But she trails oﬀ as her attention returns to the stone
bench.
“Oh, hell,” she mutters, looking around the empty square.
Because Luc, of course, is gone.

437

New York City
April 6, 2014

VI
“He just left you there?” says Henry, aghast.
Addie takes a fry, turning it between her ﬁngers. “There
are worse places to be left.”
They’re sitting at a high-top table in a so-called pub—
what passes for a pub outside of Britain—sharing an order of
vinegary ﬁsh-and-chips and a pint of warm beer.
A waiter passes by, and smiles at Henry.
A pair of girls heading for the bathroom slow as they
come into his orbit, and stare as they leave again.
A stream of words drifts over from a nearby table, the
low, rapid staccato of German, and Addie’s mouth twitches
in a smile.
“What is it?” asks Henry.
She leans in. “The couple over there.” She tilts her head
in their direction. “They’re having a ﬁght. Apparently the
guy slept with his secretary. And his assistant. And his
Pilates instructor. The woman knew about the ﬁrst two, but
she’s mad about the third, because they both take Pilates at
the same studio.”
Henry stares at her, marveling. “How many languages do
you know?”
“Enough,” she says, but he clearly wants to know, so she
ticks them oﬀ on her ﬁngers. “French, of course. And

438

English. Greek and Latin. German, Italian, Spanish, Swiss,
some Portuguese, though it’s not perfect.”
“You would have made an amazing spy.”
She raises a brow behind her pint. “Who says I haven’t
been one?”
The plates are empty when she looks around, sees the
waiter duck into the kitchen. “Come on,” she says, grabbing
his hand.
Henry frowns. “We haven’t paid.”
“I know,” she says, hopping down from the stool, “but if
we go now, he’ll think he just forgot to clear the table. He
won’t remember.”
This is the problem with a life like Addie’s.
She has gone so long without roots, she doesn’t know
how to grow them anymore.
So used to losing things, she isn’t sure how to hold them.
How to make space in a world the size of herself.
“No,” says Henry. “He won’t remember you. But he’ll
remember me. I’m not invisible, Addie. I’m the exact
opposite of invisible.”
Invisible. The word scrapes over her skin.
“I’m not invisible either,” she says.
“You know what I mean. I can’t just come and go. And
even if I could,” he says, reaching for his wallet, “it would
still be wrong.”
The word hits like a blow, and she is back in Paris,
doubled over with hunger. She is at the marquis’s house,
dining in stolen clothes, stomach twisting as Luc points out
that someone will pay for every bite she takes.
Her face burns with shame.
“Fine,” she says, pulling a handful of twenties from her
pocket. She drops two on the table. “Better?” But when she
looks at Henry, his frown has only deepened.
“Where did you get that money?”

439

She doesn’t want to tell him that she walked out of a
designer store and into a pawn shop, moving pieces from
one hand to the other. Doesn’t want to explain that
everything she has—everything besides him—is stolen. And
that in some ways, so is he. Addie doesn’t want to see the
judgment on his face, doesn’t want to think about how
merited it might be.
“Does it matter?” she asks.
And Henry says, “Yes,” with so much conviction, she
ﬂushes crimson.
“Do you think I want to live like this?” Addie grits her
teeth. “No job, no ties, no way to hold on to anyone or
anything? Do you think I like being so alone?”
Henry looks pained. “You aren’t alone,” he says. “You
have me.”
“I know, but you shouldn’t have to do everything—be
everything.”
“I don’t mind—”
“But I do!” she snaps, thrown by the anger in her own
voice. “I’m a person, not a pet, Henry, and I don’t need you
looking down at me, or coddling me either. I do what I have
to, and it’s not always nice, and it’s not always fair, but it’s
how I survive. I’m sorry you disapprove. But this is who I am.
This is what works for me.”
Henry shakes his head. “But it won’t work for us.”
Addie pulls back as if struck. Suddenly the pub is too loud,
too full, and she can’t stand there, can’t stand still, so she
turns, and storms out.
The moment the night air hits her, she feels ill.
The world rocks, re-steadies … and somewhere between
one step and the next, the anger evaporates, and she just
feels tired, and sad.
She doesn’t understand how the night went sideways.

440

Doesn’t understand the sudden weight on her chest until
she realizes what it is—fear. Fear that she’s messed up,
thrown away the one thing she’s always wanted. Fear that it
was that fragile, that it came apart so easily.
But then she hears footsteps, feels Henry coming up
beside her.
He doesn’t say anything, only walks, half a step behind,
and this is a new kind of silence. The silent aftermath of
storms, the damage not yet tallied.
Addie swipes a tear from her cheek. “Did I ruin it?”
“Ruin what?” he asks.
“Us.”
“Addie.” He grabs her shoulder. She turns, expecting to
see his face streaked with anger, but it’s steady, smooth. “It
was just a ﬁght. It’s not the end of the world. It’s certainly
not the end of us.”
Three hundred years she’s dreamed of this.
She always thought it would be easy.
The opposite of Luc.
“I don’t know how to be with someone,” she whispers. “I
don’t know how to be a normal person.”
His mouth quirks into a crooked grin. “You’re incredible,
and strong, and stubborn, and brilliant. But I think it’s safe
to say you’re never going to be normal.”
They walk, arm in arm, through the cool night air.
“Did you go back to Paris?” asks Henry.
It is an olive branch, a bridge built, and she is grateful for
it.
“Eventually,” she says.
It had taken far longer to get back there, without Luc’s
help, or her naïve drive to reach the city, and she’s
embarrassed to say she did not hurry back. That even if Luc
meant to abandon her, stranding her there in Florence, in

441

doing so he broke a kind of seal. In yet another, maddening
way, he forced her free.
Until that moment, Addie had never conceived of leaving
France. It’s absurd to think of now, but the world felt so
much smaller then. And then, suddenly, it was not.
Perhaps he meant to cast her into chaos.
Perhaps he thought she was getting too comfortable,
growing too stubborn.
Perhaps he wanted her to call for him again. To beg him to
come back.
Perhaps perhaps perhaps—but she will never know.

442

Venice, Italy
July 29, 1806

VII
Addie wakes to sunlight and silk sheets.
Her limbs feel leaden, her head full of muslin. The kind of
heaviness that comes with too much sun, and too much
sleep.
It is ungodly hot in Venice, hotter than it ever was in Paris.
The window is open, but neither the faint breeze nor the
silk bedding are enough to dissipate the stiﬂing heat. It is
only morning, and sweat already beads on her bare skin.
She is dreading the thought of midday as she drags herself
awake, and sees Matteo perched at the foot of the bed.
He is just as beautiful in daylight, sun-kissed and strong,
but she is struck less by his lovely features, and more by the
strange calm of the moment.
Mornings are usually muddled with apologies, confusion,
the aftermath of forgetting. They are sometimes painful,
and always awkward.
But Matteo seems utterly unfazed.
He doesn’t remember her, of course, that much is obvious
—but her presence there, this stranger in his bed, seems
neither to startle nor to bother him. His attention is focused
solely on the sketchpad balanced on his knee, the charcoal
skating gracefully across the paper. It is only when his gaze
ﬂicks up to her, and then down again, that she realizes he is
drawing her.

443

She makes no move to cover herself, to reach for the slip
cast oﬀ on the chair, or the thin robe at the foot of the bed.
Addie hasn’t been shy about her body in a long time.
Indeed, she has come to enjoy being admired. Perhaps it is
the natural abandon that comes with time, or perhaps it is
the constancy of her shape, or perhaps it is the liberation
that comes with knowing her spectators won’t remember.
There is a freedom, after all, in being forgotten.
And yet, Matteo is still drawing, the motions swift and
easy.
“What are you doing?” she asks gently, and he tears his
gaze from the parchment.
“I’m sorry,” he says. “The way you looked. I had to
capture it.”
Addie frowns, begins to rise, but he lets out a stiﬂed
sound and says, “Not yet,” and it takes all her strength to
stay there, on the bed, hands tangled in the sheets until he
sighs and sets the work aside, eyes glazed with the
afterglow unique to artists.
“Can I see?” she asks in the melodic Italian she has
learned.
“It is not ﬁnished,” he says, even as he oﬀers her the pad.
Addie stares at the drawing. The marks are easy,
imprecise, a quick study by a talented hand. Her face is
barely drawn, almost abstract in the gestures of light and
shadow.
It is her—and it is not her.
An image, distorted by the ﬁlter of someone else’s style.
But she can see herself in it. From the curve of her cheek to
the shape of her shoulders, the sleep-mussed hair and the
charcoal dots scattered across her face. Seven freckles
charted out like stars.
She brushes the charcoal toward the bottom edge of the
page, where her limbs dissolve into the linens of the bed,

444

feels it smudge against her skin.
But when she lifts her hand away, her thumb is stained,
and the line is clean. She has not left a mark. And yet, she
has. She has impressed herself upon Matteo, and he has
impressed her upon the page.
“Do you like it?” he asks.
“Yes,” she murmurs, resisting the urge to tear the
drawing from the pad, to take it with her. Every inch of her
wants to have it, to keep it, to stare at the image like
Narcissus in the pond. But if she takes it now, then it will
ﬁnd a way to disappear, or it will belong to her, and her
alone, and then it will be as good as lost, forgotten.
If Matteo keeps the picture, he will forget the source, but
not the sketch itself. Perhaps he will turn to it when she is
gone, and wonder at the woman sprawled across his sheets,
and even if he thinks it the product of some drunken revel,
some fever dream, her image will still be there, charcoal on
parchment, a palimpsest beneath a ﬁnished work.
It will be real, and so will she.
So Addie studies the drawing, grateful for the prism of her
memory, and hands it back to her artist. She rises, reaching
for her clothes.
“Did we have a good time?” Matteo asks. “I confess, I
cannot remember.”
“Neither can I,” she lies.
“Well then,” he says with a rakish grin. “It must have
been a very good time.”
He kisses her bare shoulder, and her pulse ﬂutters, body
warming with the memory of the night before. She is a
stranger to him now, but Matteo has the easy passion of an
artist enamored with his newest subject. It would be simple
enough to stay, to start again, enjoy his company another
day—but her thoughts are still on the drawing, the meaning
of those lines, the weight of them.

445

“I must go,” she says, leaning in to kiss him one last time.
“Try to remember me.”
He laughs, the sound breezy and light as he pulls her
close, leaves ghosts of charcoal ﬁngers on her skin. “How
could I possibly forget?”

That night, the sunset turns the canals to gold.
Addie stands on a bridge over the water, and rubs at the
charcoal still on her thumb, and thinks of the drawing, an
artist’s rendition, like an echo of the truth, thinks of Luc’s
own words so long ago, when he cast her from Geoﬀrin’s
salon.
Ideas are wilder than memories.
He meant it as a barb, no doubt, but she should have
seen it as a clue, a key.
Memories are stiﬀ, but thoughts are freer things. They
throw out roots, they spread and tangle, and come
untethered from their source. They are clever, and stubborn,
and perhaps—perhaps—they are in reach.
Because two blocks away, in that small studio over the
café, there is an artist, and on one of his pages, there is a
drawing, and it is of her. And now Addie closes her eyes, and
tips her head back, and smiles, hope swelling in her chest. A
crack in the walls of this unyielding curse. She thought she’d
studied every inch, but here, a door, ajar onto a new and
undiscovered room.
The air changes at her back, the crisp scent of trees,
impossible and out of place in the rank Venetian heat.
Her eyes drift open. “Good evening, Luc.”
“Adeline.”
She turns to face him, this man she made real, this
darkness, this devil brought to life. And when he asks if she

446

has had enough, if she is tired yet, if she will yield to him
tonight, she smiles, and says, “Not tonight.”
Rubs her ﬁnger anew against her thumb, and feels the
charcoal there, and thinks of telling him about her
discovery, just to savor his surprise.
I have found a way to leave a mark, she wants to say to
him. You thought you could erase me from this world, but
you cannot. I am still here. I will always be here.
The taste of the words—that triumph—is sweet as sugar
on her tongue. But there is a warning tint to his gaze
tonight, and knowing Luc, he would ﬁnd a way to turn it
against her, to take this small solace from her before she’s
found a way to use it.
So she says nothing.

447

New York City
April 25, 2014

VIII
A wave of applause rolls across the grass.
It’s a gorgeous spring day, one of the ﬁrst where the
warmth lingers as the sun goes down, and they’re sitting on
a blanket at the edge of Prospect Park as performers ﬁle on
and oﬀ a pop-up stage across the green.
“I can’t believe you remember it all,” he says as a new
singer climbs the steps.
“It’s like living with déjà vu,” she says, “only you know
exactly where you’ve seen or heard or felt a thing before.
You know every time, and place, and they sit stacked on top
of each other like pages in a very long and complicated
book.”
Henry shakes his head. “I would have lost my mind.”
“Oh, I did,” she says blithely. “But when you live long
enough, even madness ends.”
The new singer is … not good.
A teenage boy whose voice is equal parts growl and
screech. Addie hasn’t been able to catch more than a word
or two of the lyrics, let alone detect a melody. But the lawn
is full, the audience brimming with enthusiasm, less for the
performance than the chance to wave their numbered
cards.
It’s Brooklyn’s answer to an open mic: a charity concert
where people pay to perform, and others pay to judge them.

448

“Seems kind of cruel,” she pointed out when Henry
handed her the cards.
“It’s for a good cause,” he said, cringing at the ﬁnal notes
of a ﬂat saxophone.
The song ends to a wave of weak applause.
The ﬁeld is a sea of 2s and 3s. Henry holds up a 9.
“You can’t give them all nines and tens,” she says.
Henry shrugs. “I feel bad for them. It takes a lot of guts to
get up there and perform. What about you?”
She looks down at the cards. “I don’t know.”
“You told me you were a talent scout.”
“Yes, well, it was easier than telling you I was a threehundred-and-twenty-three-year-old ghost whose only hobby
is inspiring artists.”
Henry reaches out and runs his ﬁnger down her cheek.
“You’re not a ghost.”
The next song starts, and ends, and scattered applause
falls like rain across the lawn.
Henry gives it a 7.
Addie holds up a 3.
Henry looks at her, aghast.
“What?” she says. “It wasn’t very good.”
“We were rating on talent? Well, shit.”
Addie laughs, and there’s a lull between acts, some
dispute about who is supposed to go up next. Canned music
spills from the speakers, and they lie back in the grass,
Addie’s head resting against his stomach, the soft in and out
of his breath like a shallow wave beneath her.
Here is a new kind of silence, rarer than the rest. The
easy quiet of familiar spaces, of places that ﬁll simply
because you are not alone within them. A notebook sits
beside them on the blanket. Not the blue one; that is
already full. This new one is an emerald green, nearly the
same shade as Luc’s eyes when he is showing oﬀ.

449

A pen juts up between the pages, holding Henry’s place.
Every day, Addie has told him stories.
Over eggs and coﬀee, she recounted the torturous walk to
Le Mans. In the bookstore one morning, as they unpacked
new releases, she relived that ﬁrst year in Paris. Tangled in
the sheets last night, she told him of Remy. Henry has asked
for the truth, her truth, and so she is telling it. In pieces,
fragments tucked like bookmarks between the movement of
their days.
Henry is like bottled lightning, unable to sit still for long,
full of nervous energy, but every moment there’s a lull, a
sliver of peace and quiet, he grabs the latest notebook, and
a pen, and even though she always thrills at the sight of the
words—her words—spilling across the page, she teases him
for the urgency with which he writes them.
“We have time,” she reminds him, smoothing his hair.
Addie stretches out against him, and looks up at the dying
light, the sky streaked purple and blue. It is almost night,
and she knows that a roof would do nothing if the darkness
looked her way, but lying here, beneath the open sky, she
still feels exposed.
They’ve been lucky, so lucky, but the trouble with luck is
that it always ends.
And perhaps it is just the nervous tapping of Henry’s
ﬁngers on the journal.
And perhaps it is just the moonless sky.
And perhaps it is just that happiness is frightening.
The next band takes the stage.
But as the music rings out across the lawn, she can’t take
her eyes from the dark.

450

London, England
March 26, 1827

IX
She could live in the National Gallery.
Indeed, she has spent a season here, wandering from
room to room, feasting on the paintings and the portraits,
the sculptures and the tapestries. A life spent among
friends, among echoes.
She moves through marble halls, and counts the pieces
she has touched, the marks left by other hands, but guided
by her own.
At last count, there were six in this particular collection.
Six pillars, holding her aloft.
Six voices, carrying her through.
Six mirrors, reﬂecting pieces of her back into the world.
There is no sign of Matteo’s sketch, not among these
ﬁnished works, but she sees those early lines reﬂected in his
masterpiece, The Muse, sees them again in the sculpture of
a face resting on a hand, the painting of a woman sitting by
the sea.
She is a ghost, a gossamer, laid like ﬁlm across the work.
But she is there.
She is there.
An attendant informs her they will be closing soon, and
Addie thanks him, and continues on her round. She could
stay, but the vast halls are not as cozy as the ﬂat in
Kensington, a gem left unattended in the winter months.

451

Addie pauses in front of her favorite piece, a portrait of a
girl before a looking glass. Her back is to the artist, the room
and girl rendered in high detail, but her reﬂection little more
than streaks. Her face rendered only in the silver smudges
of the mirror. And yet, up close, anyone would see the
scattering of freckles, like ﬂoating stars against the warped
grey sky.
“How clever you are,” says a voice behind her.
Addie was alone in the gallery, and now she is not.
She glances left, and sees Luc staring past her at the
painting, his head inclined as if admiring the work, and for a
moment, Addie feels like a cabinet, the doors ﬂung open.
She is not coiled, not wound tight with waiting, because
there are still months until their anniversary.
“What are you doing here?” she asks.
His mouth twitches once, relishing her surprise. “I am
everywhere.”
It has never occurred to her that he could come as he
pleased, that he is not bound in some way by the dates of
their deal. That his visits, just like the absence of them,
have always been by design—by choice.
“I see you’ve been busy,” he says, those green eyes
trailing over the portrait.
She has. She has scattered herself like breadcrumbs,
dusted across a hundred works of art. It would not be a
simple thing for him to erase them all. And yet, there is a
darkness to his gaze, a mood she distrusts.
He reaches out, trails a ﬁnger along the frame.
“Destroy it,” she says, “and I will make more.”
“It does not matter,” he says, hand falling. “You do not
matter, Adeline.”
The words bite, even now.
“Take your echoes and pretend they are a voice.”

452

She is no stranger to Luc’s foul moods, his streaks of ill
temper, brief and bright as lightning. But there is a violence
to his tone tonight. An edge, and she does not think it is her
cunning that’s upset him, this glimpse of her folded
between the layers of the art.
No, this dark mood is one that he’s brought with him.
A shadow dragging in his wake.
But it’s been almost a century since she struck him, that
night in Villon, when he struck back, reduced her to a
gnarled corpse on the ﬂoor of Estele’s house. And so instead
of retreating at the sight of teeth, she rises to the bait.
“You said it yourself, Luc. Ideas are wilder than memories.
And I can be wild. I can be stubborn as the weeds, and you
will not root me out. And I think you are glad of it. I think
that’s why you’ve come, because you are lonely, too.”
Luc’s eyes ﬂash a sickly, stormy green. “Don’t be absurd,”
he sneers. “Gods are known to everyone.”
“But remembered by so few,” she counters. “How many
mortals have met you more than twice—once to make a
deal and once to pay the price? How many have been a part
of your life as long as I have?” Addie ﬂashes a triumphant
smile. “Perhaps that’s why you cursed me as you did. So
you would have some company. So someone would
remember you.”
He is on her in an instant, pressing her back against the
museum wall. “I cursed you for being a fool.”
And Addie laughs.
“You know, when I imagined the old gods, as a child, I
thought of you as grand immortals, above the petty worries
that plagued your worshipers. I thought that you were
bigger than us. But you’re not. You’re just as ﬁckle and
wanting as the humans you disdain.” His hands tighten on
her, but she does not quiver, does not cower, simply holds
his gaze. “We are not so diﬀerent, are we?”

453

Luc’s anger hardens, cools, the green of his eyes plunging
into black. “You claim to know me so well now. Let us see…”
His hand drops from her shoulder to her wrist, and too late,
she realizes what he means to do.
It has been forty years since he last dragged her through
the dark, but she hasn’t forgotten the feeling, the primal
fear and the wild hope and the reckless freedom of doors
thrown open onto night.
It is inﬁnite—
And then it is over, and she is on her hands and knees on
a wooden ﬂoor, limbs trembling from the strangeness of the
journey.
A bed lies, disheveled and empty, the curtains have been
ﬂung wide, and the ﬂoor is covered in sheets of music, and
there is a stale air of sickness to the space.
“What a waste,” murmurs Luc.
Addie rises unsteadily to her feet. “Where are we?”
“You mistake me for some lonesome mortal,” he says.
“Some heartsick human in search of company. I am neither.”
Movement, across the room, and she realizes they are not
alone. A ghost of a man, white-haired and wild-eyed, sits on
a piano bench, his back to the keys.
He is pleading in German.
“Not yet,” he says, clutching a handful of music to his
chest. “Not yet. I need more time.”
His voice is strange, too loud, as if he cannot hear. But
Luc’s, when he answers, is a smooth hard tone, a low bell, a
sound felt as much as heard.
“The vexing thing about time,” he says, “is that it’s never
enough. Perhaps a decade too short, perhaps a moment.
But a life always ends too soon.”
“Please,” begs the man, sinking to his hands and knees
before the darkness, and Addie ﬂinches for him, knows his
pleas won’t work.

454

“Let me make another deal!”
Luc forces the man to his feet. “The time for deals is
done, Herr Beethoven. Now, you must say the words.”
The man shakes his head. “No.”
And Addie cannot see Luc’s eyes, but she can feel his
temper changing. The air ripples in the room around them, a
wind, and something stronger.
“Surrender your soul,” says Luc. “Or I will take it by
force.”
“No!” shouts the man, hysterical now. “Begone, Devil.
Begone, and—”
It is the last thing he says, before Luc unfolds.
That is the only way to think of it.
The black hair rises from his face, climbing through the air
like weeds, and his skin ripples and splits, and what spills
out is not a man. It is a monster. It is a god. It is the night
itself, and something else, something she has never seen,
something she cannot bear to look at. Something older than
the dark.
“Surrender.”
And now the voice is not a voice at all, but a medley of
snapping branches and summer wind, a wolf’s low growl,
and the sudden shifting of rocks underfoot.
The man burbles and pleads. “Help!” he cries out, but it is
no use. If there is anyone beyond the door, they will not
hear.
“Help!” he cries again, uselessly.
And then the monster plunges its hand into his chest.
The man staggers, pale and gray, as the darkness plucks
his soul like a piece of fruit. It comes loose with a tearing
sound, and the composer stumbles, and falls to the ﬂoor.
But Addie’s eyes are locked on the bloom of light in the
shadow’s hand, jagged and unsteady. And before she can
study the ribbons of color curling on its surface, before she

455

can wonder at the images coiling inside, the darkness closes
its ﬁngers around the soul, and it crackles through him like
lightning, and plunges out of sight.
The composer sits slumped against his piano bench, head
back, and eyes empty.
Luc’s hand, she will learn, is always subtle. They will see
his work and call it sickness, call it heart failure, call it
madness, suicide, overdose, accident.
But tonight, she only knows that the man on the ﬂoor is
dead.
The darkness turns on Addie, then, and there is no
vestige of Luc in the roiling smoke. There are no green eyes.
No playful smirk. Nothing but a menacing void, a shadow
ﬁlled with teeth.
It has been a long time since Addie felt true fear. Sadness,
she knows; loneliness and grief. But fear belongs to those
with more to lose.
And yet.
Staring into that dark, Addie is afraid.
She wills her legs to stay, wills herself to hold her ground,
and she does, as it takes its ﬁrst step, and its second, but by
the third, she ﬁnds herself retreating. Away from the
writhing dark, the monstrous night, until her back comes to
rest against the wall.
But the darkness keeps coming.
With every forward step it draws itself together, the
edges ﬁrming until it is less a storm than smoke bottled into
glass. The face ﬁnds form, shadows twisting into loose black
curls, and the eyes—there are eyes again now—lighten like
a drying stone, and the cavernous maw narrows to a cupid’s
bow, the lips curving into sly content.
And he is Luc again, wrapped in the guise of ﬂesh and
bone, close enough that she can feel the cool night air
wafting oﬀ him like a breeze.

456

And this time, when he speaks, it is with the voice she
knows so well.
“Well, my darling…” he says, one hand rising to her
cheek. “Are we so diﬀerent now?”
She does not have the chance to answer.
He gives the barest push, and the wall opens up behind
her, and she is not sure if she falls, or if the shadows reach
out and pull her down, only that Luc is gone, and the
composer’s room is gone, and for an instant, the dark is
everywhere, and then she is standing outside, on the
cobblestone banks, and the night is full of laughter and
lights shining on the water, and the soft, melodic strain of a
man singing somewhere along the Thames.

457

New York City
May 15, 2014

X
It is Addie’s idea to bring the cat home.
Perhaps she has always longed for a pet.
Perhaps she simply thinks he must be lonely.
Perhaps she thinks it will do Henry good.
She does not know. It does not matter. All that does is
that one day, as he is closing up the store, she appears next
to him on the stoop, a novel under one arm and the ancient
tabby in the other, and that is that.
They carry Book back to Henry’s place, and introduce him
to the blue door, and go up to the narrow Brooklyn
apartment, and despite Henry’s superstition, he does not
turn to dust, severed from his store. He simply toddles
around for an hour before leaning up against a philosophy
stack, and he is home.
And so is she.
They are curled together on the couch when she hears
the click of the Polaroid, catches the sudden ﬂash, and
there’s a moment when she wonders if it will work, if Henry
will be able to take her photo, the way he wrote her name.
But even the writing in his journals isn’t entirely hers. It’s
her story in his pen, her life in their words.
And sure enough, when the ﬁlm exposes, and the Polaroid
appears, it’s not of her, not really. The girl in the frame has
her wavy brown hair. The girl in the frame wears her white

458

shirt. But the girl in the frame has no face. If she does, it’s
turned from the camera, as if caught in the process of
spinning away.
And she knew it wouldn’t work, but her heart still sinks.
“I don’t get it,” says Henry, turning the camera in his
hands.
“Can I try again?” he asks, and she understands the urge.
It is harder to manage, when the impossible is so obvious.
Your mind can’t make sense of it, so you try again and again
and again, convinced that this time, it will be diﬀerent.
This, she knows, is how you go mad.
But Addie indulges Henry as he tries a second time, and a
third. Watches as the camera jams, spits out a blank card,
comes back overexposed, underexposed, blurred, until her
head is swimming with ﬂashes of white.
She lets him try diﬀerent angles, diﬀerent light, until
photos litter the ﬂoor between them. She’s there, and not
there, real, and a ghost.
He must see her fraying a little more with every ﬂash, the
sadness rising through the cracks, and forces himself to put
the camera down.
Addie stares at the photos, and thinks of the painting in
London, of Luc’s voice in her head.
It does not matter.
You do not matter.
She picks up the latest attempt, studies the shape of the
girl in the frame, her features blurred beyond recognition.
She closes her eyes, reminds herself there are many ways
to leave a mark, reminds herself that pictures lie.
And then she feels the solid body of the camera being
placed into her hands, and she is drawing in the breath to
tell him it will not work, it will not, but then Henry is there,
behind her, folding her ﬁngers over his, lifting the viewﬁnder
to her eye. Letting her guide the pressure of his hands the

459

way she did the paint on the glass wall. And her heart
quickens as she lines up a shot of the photos littering the
ﬂoor, her own bare feet at the bottom of the frame.
She holds her breath, and hopes.
A click. A ﬂash.
This time, the picture comes out.

Here is a life in still frames.
Moments like Polaroids. Like paintings. Like ﬂowers
pressed between the pages of a book. Perfectly preserved.
The three of them, napping in the sun.
Addie, stroking Henry’s hair while she tells him stories,
and he writes, and writes, and writes.
Henry, pressing her down into the bed, their ﬁngers
tangled, their breath quick, her name an echo in her hair.
Here they are, together in his galley kitchen, his arms
threaded through hers, her hands over his as they stir
béchamel, as they knead bread dough.
When it is in the oven, he cups her face with ﬂoury hands,
leaves trails everywhere he touches.
They make a mess, as the room ﬁlls with the scent of
freshly baking bread.
And in the morning it looks like ghosts have danced
across the kitchen, and they pretend there were two instead
of one.

460

Villon-sur-Sarthe, France
July 29, 1854

XI
Villon was not supposed to change.
When she was growing up, it was always so painfully still,
like summer air before a storm. A village carved in stone.
And yet, what was it Luc said?
Even rocks wear away to nothing.
Villon has not worn away. Instead, it has shifted, grown,
new roots thrown out, and others cut. The woods have been
forced back, trees on the forest edge all felled to feed
hearth ﬁres and make way for ﬁelds and crops. There are
more walls now than there were before. More buildings.
More roads.
As Addie makes her way through town, hair tucked
beneath a well-trimmed bonnet, she marks a name, a face,
a ghost of a ghost of a family she once knew. But the Villon
of her youth has ﬁnally faded, and she wonders if this is
what memory feels like for others, this slow erasure of
details.
For the ﬁrst time, she does not recognize every path.
For the ﬁrst time, she is not sure she knows her way.
She takes a turn, expecting to ﬁnd one house, but instead
ﬁnds two, divided by a low stone wall. She goes left, but
instead of an open ﬁeld, she ﬁnds a stable, surrounded by a
fence. At last, she recognizes the road home, holds her
breath as she makes her way down the path, feels

461

something inside her loosen at the sight of the old yew tree,
still bent and knotted at the edge of the property.
But beyond the tree, the place is changed. New clothes
laid over old bones.
Her father’s workshop has been cleared away, the
footprint of the shed marked only by a shadow on the
ground, the weedy grass long ﬁlled in, a slightly diﬀerent
shade. And though Addie braced herself for the stale
stillness of abandoned places, she is met instead by motion,
voices, laughter.
Someone else has moved into her family home, one of
the new arrivals in the growing town. A family, with a
mother who smiles more, and a father who doesn’t, and a
pair of boys running in the yard, their hair the color of straw.
The older one chases a dog who has absconded with a sock,
and the younger one climbs the old yew tree, his bare feet
ﬁnding the same knots and crooks as hers, back when she
was a girl, the drawing pad tucked under her arm. She must
have been his age … or was she older?
She closes her eyes, tries to catch hold of the image, but
it slips and slides between her ﬁngers. Those early
memories, not trapped within the prism. Those years before,
lost to that other life. Her eyes are only closed a moment,
but when she opens them, the tree is empty. The boy is
gone.
“Hello,” says a voice, somewhere behind her.
It is the younger one, his face open and upturned.
“Hello,” she says.
“Are you lost?”
She hesitates, torn between yes and no, unsure which is
closer to the truth.
“I am a ghost,” she says. The boy’s eyes widen in
surprise, delight, and he asks her to prove it. She tells him
to close his eyes, and when he does, she slips away.

462

In the cemetery, the tree Addie transplanted has taken root.
It looms over Estele’s grave, bathing her bones in a pool
of shade.
Addie runs her hand over the bark, marvels at how the
sapling has grown into a wide-trunked tree, its roots and
branches escaping to every side. A hundred years since it
was planted—a span of time once too long to fathom, and
now, too hard to measure. So far, she has counted time in
seconds, and in seasons, in cold snaps and in thaws, in
uprisings and in aftermaths. She has seen buildings fall and
rise, cities burn and be remade, the past and present
blurred together into a ﬂuid, ephemeral thing.
But this, this is tangible.
The years marked in wood and bark, root and soil.
Addie sits back against the woman’s grave and rests her
own aged bones in the dappled shade, and recounts the
time since her last visit. She tells Estele stories of England,
and Italy, and Spain, of Matteo, and the gallery, of Luc, and
her art, and all the ways the world has changed. And even
though there is no answer, save the rustle of leaves, she
knows what the old woman would say.
Everything changes, foolish girl. It is the nature of the
world. Nothing stays the same.
Except for me, she thinks, but Estele answers, dry as
kindling.
Not even you.
She has missed the old woman’s counsel, even in her
head. The voice has gone brittle, worn away in the
intervening years, smudged like all those mortal memories.
But here, at least, it returns to her.
The sun has crossed the sky by the time she rises and
walks to the edge of the village, to the edge of the woods,

463

to the place the old woman once called home. But time has
claimed this place as well. The garden, once overgrown, has
been swallowed up by the encroaching woods, and the wild
has won its war against the hut, dragged it down, saplings
jutting up among the bones. The wood has rotted, the
stones have slipped, the roof is gone, and weed and vine
are in the slow process of dismantling the rest.
The next time she comes, there will be no trace, the
remains swallowed by the advancing woods. But for now,
there is still the skeleton, being slowly buried by the moss.
Addie is halfway to the decaying hut when she realizes it
is not entirely deserted.
A shiver of motion in the ruined mound, and she squints,
expecting to ﬁnd a rabbit, or perhaps a young deer. Instead,
she ﬁnds a boy. He is playing amid the ruins, climbing the
remains of the old stone walls, swatting at weeds with a
switch pulled from the woods.
She knows him. It is the older son, the boy she ﬁrst saw
chasing a dog through her yard. He is maybe nine, or ten.
Old enough for his eyes to narrow in suspicion when he sees
her.
He holds out his switch as if it were a sword.
“Who are you?” he demands.
And this time she is not content to be a ghost. “I am a
witch.”
She doesn’t know why she says it. Perhaps simply to
humor herself. Perhaps because when truth is not an option,
ﬁction takes on a mind of its own. Or perhaps because it is
what Estele would say, if she were here.
A shadow crosses the boy’s face. “No such thing as
witches,” he says, but his voice is unsteady as he says it,
and when she steps forward, shoes cracking over sun-dried
branches, he begins to back away.

464

“Those are my bones you’re playing on,” she warns. “I
suggest you get down before you fall.”
The boy stumbles in surprise, nearly slips on a patch of
moss.
“Unless you’d rather stay,” she muses. “I’m sure there’s
room for yours as well.”
The boy makes it back to the ground, and takes oﬀ
running. Addie watches him go, Estele’s crow-like laughter
cawing in her ears.
She doesn’t feel bad for scaring the child; she does not
expect him to remember. And yet, tomorrow, he will come
again, and she will stand hidden at the edge of the woods
and watch him begin to climb the ruins, only to hesitate, a
nervous shadow in his eyes. She will watch him back away,
and wonder if he is thinking of witches and half-buried
bones. If the idea has grown like a weed in his head.
But today, Addie is alone, and her mind is only on Estele.
She runs her hands along a half-fallen wall, and thinks of
staying, of becoming the witch by the woods, the ﬁgment of
someone else’s dream. She imagines rebuilding the old
woman’s house, even kneels to stack a few small stones.
But by the fourth, the pile crumbles, the rocks landing in the
weedy grass exactly as they were before she lifted them.
The ink unwrites.
The wound uncuts.
The house unbuilds.
Addie sighs as a handful of birds take ﬂight from the
nearby woods, croaking laughter. She turns toward the
trees. There is still light left, an hour maybe until night, and
yet, staring into the forest, she can feel the darkness staring
back. She wades between the half-buried stones and steps
into the shade beneath the trees.
A shiver slides through her.
It is like stepping through a veil.

465

She weaves between the trees. Once, she would have
been afraid of getting lost. Now, the steps are carved into
her memory. She could not lose her way even if she tried.
The air is cooler here, the night closer beneath the
canopy. It is easy to see, now, how she lost track of time
that day. How the line between dusk and dark became so
blurred. And she wonders, would she have called out, had
she known the hour?
Would she have prayed, knowing which god would
answer?
She does not answer herself.
She does not need to.
She doesn’t know how long he’s been there, at her back,
if he followed her some time in quiet. Only knows the
moment she hears branches crack behind her.
“What a strange pilgrimage you insist on making.”
Addie smiles to herself. “Is it?”
She turns to see Luc leaning back against a tree.
It is not the ﬁrst time she’s seen him since the night he
reaped Beethoven’s soul. But she still hasn’t forgotten what
she saw. Nor has she forgotten that he wanted her to see it,
to look at him, and know the truth of his power. But it was a
foolish thing to do. Like tipping a hand of cards when the
highest bets are on the table.
I see you, she thinks as he straightens from the tree. I
have seen your truest form. You cannot scare me now.
He steps into a shallow pool of light.
“What drives you back here?” he asks.
Addie shrugs. “Call it nostalgia.”
He lifts his chin. “I call it weakness. To only walk in circles
when you could make new roads.”
Addie frowns. “How am I supposed to make a road when I
cannot even raise a pile of stones? Set me free, and see
then how well I fare.”

466

He sighs, and dissolves into the dark.
When he speaks again, he is behind her, his voice a
breeze through her hair. “Adeline, Adeline,” he chides, and
she knows that if she turns again, he will not be there, and
so she holds her ground, keeps her eyes on the forest. Does
not ﬂinch when his hands slide over her skin. When his arm
snakes around her shoulders.
Up close, he smells of oak, and leaf, and rain-soaked ﬁeld.
“Aren’t you tired?” he whispers.
And she ﬂinches at the words.
She braced for his attack, his verbal barbs, but she was
not braced for that question, not braced for the almost
gentle way he asks.
It has been a hundred and forty years. A century and a
half, living as an echo, as a ghost. Of course she is tired.
“Wouldn’t you like to rest, my dear?”
The words drag like gossamer against her skin.
“I could bury you here, beside Estele. Plant a tree, make it
grow over your bones.”
Addie closes her eyes.
Yes, she is tired.
She may not feel the years weakening her bones, her
body going brittle with age, but the weariness is a physical
thing, like rot, inside her soul. There are days when she
mourns the prospect of another year, another decade,
another century. There are nights when she cannot sleep,
moments when she lies awake and dreams of dying.
But then she wakes, and sees the pink and orange dawn
against the clouds, or hears the lament of a lone ﬁddle, the
music and the melody, and remembers there is such beauty
in the world.
And she does not want to miss it—any of it.
Addie turns in the circle of Luc’s arms, and looks up into
his face.

467

She doesn’t know if it’s the creeping night, or the nature
of the woods themselves, but he looks diﬀerent. These last
few years, she has seen him bound in velvet and lace, done
up in the latest fashion. And she has seen him as the void,
unbridled and violent. But here, he is neither.
Here, he is the darkness she met that night. Feral magic
in a lover’s form.
His edges blur into shadow, his skin the color of
moonlight, his eyes the exact shade of the moss behind
him. He is wild.
But so is she.
“Tired?” she says, summoning a smile. “I am just waking
up.”
She braces for his displeasure, the feral shadow, the ﬂash
of teeth.
But there is no trace of yellow in his eyes.
In fact, they are a new and lurid shade of green.
It will take years for her to learn the meaning of that
color, to understand it as amusement.
Tonight, there is only that brief glimpse, and then the
brush of his lips against her cheek.
“Even rocks,” he murmurs, and then he’s gone.

468

New York City
June 13, 2014

XII
A boy and a girl walk arm in arm.
They’re heading to the Knitting Factory, and like most
things in Williamsburg, it isn’t what it sounds like, not a craft
store or a place for yarn, but a concert venue on the
northern edge of Brooklyn.
It is Henry’s birthday.
Earlier, when he asked her when her birthday was, and
when she told him it was back in March, a shadow crossed
his face.
“I’m sorry I missed it.”
“That’s the great thing about birthdays,” she said, leaning
against him. “They happen every year.”
She’d laughed a little then, and so had he, but there was
something hollow in his voice, a sadness she mistook for
mere distraction.
Henry’s friends have already staked out a table near the
stage, small boxes stacked on the table between them.
“Henry!” shouts Robbie, a pair of bottles already empty in
front of him.
Bea ruﬄes his hair. “Our literal sweet summer child.”
Their attention slides past him, and lands on her.
“Hi guys,” he says, “this is Addie.”
“Finally!” says Bea. “We’ve been dying to meet you.”
Of course, they already have.

469

They’ve been asking for weeks to meet the new girl in
Henry’s life. They keep accusing him of hiding her, but
Addie has met them over beers at the Merchant, been for
movie nights at Bea’s, crossed paths with them at galleries
and parks. And every time, Bea talks of déjà vu, and then
again of artistic movements, and every time Robbie sulks,
despite Addie’s best eﬀorts to placate him.
It seems to bother Henry more than it does her. He must
think she has made peace with it, but the truth is, there is
none to be found. The endless cycle of hello, who is this,
nice to meet you, hello wears at her like water against stone
—the damage slow, but inevitable. She has simply learned
to live with it.
“You know,” says Bea, studying her, “you look so
familiar.”
Robbie rises from the table to get a round of drinks, and
Addie’s chest tightens at the thought of him resetting, of
having to start it all again, but Henry steps in, touches
Robbie’s arm. “I’ve got it,” he says.
“Birthday doesn’t pay!” protests Bea, but Henry waves
her oﬀ and wades away through the growing crowd.
And Addie is left alone with his friends. “It’s really great to
meet you both,” she says. “Henry talks about you all the
time.”
Robbie’s eyes narrow in suspicion.
She can feel the wall rising up between them, again, but
she’s no stranger to Robbie’s moods, not anymore, and so
she presses on. “You’re an actor, right? I’d love to come to
one of your performances. Henry says you’re amazing.”
He picks at the label on his beer. “Yeah, sure…” he
mumbles, but she catches the edge of a smile when he says
it.
And then Bea cuts in. “Henry seems happy. Really happy.”
“I am,” says Henry, setting down a round of beers.

470

“To twenty-nine,” says Bea, raising her glass.
They proceed to debate the merits of the age, and agree
it is a fairly useless year, as far as birthdays go, falling just
shy of the monumental thirty.
Bea collars Henry. “But next year, you’ll oﬃcially be an
adult.”
“I’m pretty sure that was eighteen,” he says.
“Don’t be ridiculous. Eighteen is old enough to vote,
twenty-one is old enough to drink, but thirty is old enough
to make decisions.”
“Closer to a midlife crisis than a quarter-life one,” teases
Robbie.
The microphone ﬂares, whining slightly as a man takes
the stage and announces a special opening act.
“He’s a rising star, I’m sure you’ve heard his name, but if
you haven’t you will soon. Give it up for Toby Marsh!”
Addie’s heart lurches.
The crowd whoops and cheers, and Robbie whistles, and
Toby steps onto the stage, that same beautiful, blushing
boy, but as he waves to the crowd, his chin lifts, his smile is
steady, proud. The diﬀerence between the ﬁrst questing
lines of a sketch and the ﬁnished drawing.
He sits down at the piano and begins to play, and the ﬁrst
notes hit her like longing. And then he begins to sing.
“I’m in love with a girl I’ve never met.”
Time slips, and she is in his living room, perched on the
piano bench, tea steaming on the windowsill as her absent
ﬁngers pick out the notes.
“But I see her every night, it seems…”
She is in his bed, his broad hands playing out the melody
on skin. Her face ﬂares hot at the memory as he sings.
“And I’m so afraid, afraid that I’ll forget her, even though
I’ve only met her in my dreams.”

471

She never gave him the words, but he found them
anyway.
His voice is clearer, stronger, his tone more conﬁdent. He
just needed the right song. Something to make the crowd
lean in and listen.
Addie squeezes her eyes shut, the past and present
tangling together in her head.
All those nights at the Alloway, watching him play.
All the times he found her at the bar, and smiled.
All those ﬁrsts that were not ﬁrsts for her.
The palimpsest bleeding up through the paper.
Toby looks up from the piano, and there’s no way he can
see her in a place this big, but she is sure his eyes meet
hers, and the room tilts a little, and she doesn’t know if it’s
the beers she drank too fast or the vertigo of memory, but
then the song ends, replaced by a warm wave of applause,
and she is on her feet, moving toward the door.
“Addie, wait,” says Henry, but she can’t, even though she
knows what it means to walk away, knows that Robbie and
Bea will forget her, and she will have to start again, and so
will Henry—but in that moment, she doesn’t care.
She cannot breathe.
The door swings open and the night rushes in, and Addie
gasps, forcing air into her lungs.
And it should feel good to hear her music, it should feel
right.
After all, she has gone to visit pieces of her art so many
times.
But they were only pieces, stripped of context. Sculptured
birds on marble plinths, and paintings behind ropes.
Didactic boxes taped to whitewashed walls and glass boxes
that keep the present from the past.
It is a diﬀerent thing when the glass breaks.
It is her mother in the doorway, withered to bone.

472

It is Remy in the Paris salon.
It is Sam, inviting her to stay, every time.
It is Toby Marsh, playing their song.
The only way Addie knows how to keep going is to keep
going forward. They are Orpheus, she is Eurydice, and every
time they turn back, she is ruined.
“Addie?” Henry is right behind her. “What’s wrong?”
“I’m sorry,” she says. She wipes the tears away and
shakes her head because the story is too long, and too
short. “I can’t go back in there, not now.”
Henry looks over his shoulder, and he must have seen the
color drop from her face during the show because he says,
“Do you know him? That Toby Marsh guy?”
She hasn’t told him that story—they haven’t gotten there
yet.
“I did,” she says, which isn’t strictly true, because it
makes it sound like something in the past, when the past is
the one thing Addie’s not entitled to, and Henry must hear
the lie buried in the words, because he frowns. He laces his
hands behind his head.
“Do you still have feelings for him?”
And she wants to be honest, to say that of course she
does. She never gets closure, never gets to say good-bye—
no periods, or exclamations, just a lifetime of ellipses.
Everyone else starts over, they get a blank page, but hers
are full of text. People talk about carrying torches for old
ﬂames, and it’s not a full ﬁre, but Addie’s hands are full of
candles. How is she supposed to set them down, or put
them out? She has long run out of air.
But it is not love.
It is not love, and that is what he’s asking.
“No,” she says. “He just—it caught me oﬀ guard. I’m
sorry.”

473

Henry asks if she wants to go home, and Addie doesn’t
know if he means both of them, or only her, doesn’t want to
ﬁnd out, so she shakes her head, and they go back in, and
the lights have changed, and the stage is empty, the house
music ﬁlling the air until the main act, and Bea and Robbie
are chatting, heads bent just the way they were when they
walked in. And Addie does her best to smile as they reach
the table.
“There you are!” says Robbie.
“Where did you run oﬀ to?” asks Bea, eyes ﬂicking from
Henry to her. “And who’s this?”
He slides his arm around her waist. “Guys, this is Addie.”
Robbie looks her up and down, but Bea only beams.
“Finally!” she says. “We’ve been dying to meet you…”

474

En Route to Berlin, Germany
July 29, 1872

XIII
The glasses rattle faintly on the table as the train rolls
through the German countryside. Addie sits in the dining
car, sipping her coﬀee and staring out the window,
marveling at the speed with which the world goes past.
Humans are capable of such wondrous things. Of cruelty,
and war, but also art and invention. She will think this again
and again over the years, when bombs are dropped, and
buildings felled, when terror consumes whole countries. But
also when the ﬁrst images are impressed on ﬁlm, when
planes rise into the air, when movies go from black-andwhite to color.
She is amazed.
She will always be amazed.
Lost in her thoughts, she doesn’t hear the conductor until
he is beside her, one hand coming to rest lightly on her
shoulder.
“Fräulein,” he says, “your ticket, please.”
Addie smiles. “Of course.”
She looks down at the table, pretends to shuﬄe through
her purse.
“I’m sorry,” she says, rising, “I must have left it in my
room.”
It is not the ﬁrst time they have done this dance, but it is
the ﬁrst time the porter has decided to follow her, trailing

475

like a shadow as she makes her way toward a car she does
not have, for a ticket that she never bought.
Addie quickens her pace, hoping to put a door between
them, but it is no use, the conductor is with her every step,
and so she slows, and stops before a door that leads to a
room that is certainly not hers, hoping that at least it will be
empty.
It is not.
As she reaches for the handle, it escapes, sliding open
onto a dim compartment, an elegant man leaning in the
doorway, black curls drawn like ink against his temples.
Relief rolls through her.
“Herr Wald,” says the conductor, straightening, as if the
man in the door were a duke, and not the darkness.
Luc smiles. “There you are, Adeline,” he says in a voice as
smooth and rich as summer honey. His green eyes slide
from her to the conductor. “She has a way of running oﬀ, my
wife. Now,” he says, a sly smile on his lips, “what’s brought
you back to me?”
Addie manages a smile of her own, cloyingly sweet.
“My love,” she says. “I forgot my ticket.”
He chuckles, drawing a slip of paper from the pocket of
his coat. Luc draws Addie close. “What a forgetful thing you
are, my dear.”
She bristles, but holds her tongue, leans instead into the
weight of him.
The conductor surveys the slip, and wishes them a
pleasant night, and the moment he is gone she pulls away
from Luc.
“My Adeline.” He clicks his tongue. “That is no way to
treat a husband.”
“I am not yours,” she says. “And I did not need your
help.”

476

“Of course not,” he answers dryly. “Come, let’s not
quarrel in the hall.”
Luc draws her into the compartment, or at least, that is
what she thinks he is doing, but instead of stepping into the
familiar conﬁnes of the cabin, she ﬁnds only the darkness,
vast and deep. Her heart catches on the missed step, the
sudden drop, as the train falls away, the world falls away,
and they are back in the nothing, the hollow space between,
and she knows she will never fully know it, never be able to
wrap her mind around the nature of the dark. Because she
realizes now, what it is, this place.
It is him.
It is the truth of him, the vast and savage night, the
darkness, full of promise, and violence, fear, and freedom.
And when the night shudders back into shape around
them, they are no longer on the German train, but on a
street, in the center of a city she does not yet know is
Munich.
And she should be mad at the abduction, the sudden
change in the direction of her night, but she cannot stiﬂe
the curiosity blossoming in the wake of her confusion. The
sudden ﬂush of something new. The thrill of adventure.
Her heart quickens, but she resolves not to let him see
her marvel.
She suspects he does anyway.
There is a pleased glint in those eyes, a thread of darker
green.
They are standing on the steps of a pillared opera house,
her traveling clothes gone, replaced by a far ﬁner dress, and
Addie wonders if the gown is real, as far as anything is real,
or simply the conjurings of smoke and shadow. Luc stands
beside her, a gray scarf around his collar, green eyes
dancing beneath the brim of a silk top hat.

477

The evening bustles with movement, men and women
climbing the steps arm in arm to see the show. She learns
that it is Wagner, it is Tristan und Isolde, though these
things mean nothing to her yet. She does not know it is the
height of his career. She does not know it has become his
masterpiece. But she can taste the promise, like sugar in
the air, as they pass through a lobby of marble columns and
painted arches, and into a concert hall of velvet and gold.
Luc rests a hand on the small of her back, guiding her
forward to the front of a balcony, a low box with a perfect
view of the stage. Her heart quickens with excitement,
before she remembers Florence.
Do not mistake this for kindness, he said. I simply want to
be the one who breaks you.
But there is no mischief in his eyes as they take their
seats. No cruel twist to his smile. Only the languid pleasure
of a cat in the sun.
Two glasses arrive, brimming with Champagne, and he
holds one out to her.
“Happy anniversary,” he says as the lights dim, and the
curtain rises.
It begins with music.
The rising tension of a symphony, notes like waves:
rolling through the hall, crashing against the walls. The
inversion of a storm against a ship.
And then, the arrival of Tristan. Of Isolde.
Their voices larger than the stage.
She has heard musicals, of course, heard symphonies and
plays, voices so pure they bring her to tears. But she has
never heard anything like this.
The way they sing. The scope and scale of their emotions.
The desperate passion in their movements. The raw
power of their joy, and pain.

478

She wants to bottle this feeling, to carry it with her
through the dark.
It will be years before she hears a record of this
symphony and turns the volume up until it hurts, surrounds
herself with sound, though it will never be the same as this.
Once, Addie tears her gaze from the players on the stage,
only to see that Luc is watching her instead of them. And
there it is again, that peculiar shade of green. Not coy, or
chiding, not cruel, but pleased.
She will realize later that this is the ﬁrst night he does not
ask for her surrender.
The ﬁrst time he makes no mention of her soul.
But right now, she is thinking only of the music, the
symphony, the story. She is drawn back to the stage by the
anguish in a note. By the tangle of limbs in an embrace, by
the look of lovers on the stage.
She leans forward, breathes the opera in until it aches
inside her chest.
The curtain falls on the ﬁrst act, and Addie is on her feet,
ringing with applause.
Luc laughs, soft as silk, as she sinks back into her seat.
“You are enjoying it.”
And she doesn’t lie, even to spite him. “It is wonderful.”
A smile plays across his face. “Can you guess which ones
are mine?”
At ﬁrst, she does not understand, and then, of course, she
does.
Her spirits sink. “Are you here to claim them?” she asks,
relieved when Luc shakes his head.
“No,” he says, “not tonight. But soon.”
Addie shakes her head. “I don’t understand. Why end
their lives as they’re reaching their peak?”
He looks at her. “They made their deal. They knew the
cost.”

479

“Why would anyone trade a lifetime of talent for a few
years of glory?”
Luc’s smile darkens. “Because time is cruel to all, and
crueler still to artists. Because vision weakens, and voices
wither, and talent fades.” He leans close, twists a lock of her
hair around one ﬁnger. “Because happiness is brief, and
history is lasting, and in the end,” he says, “everyone wants
to be remembered.”
The words are a knife, cutting swift and deep.
Addie knocks his hand away, and turns her attention back
to the stage as the opera resumes.

It is a long play, and yet, it is over too soon.
Hours, gone in moments. Addie wishes she could stay,
tucked in this seat, and start the opera again, fold herself
between the lovers and their tragedy, lose herself in the
beauty of their voices.
And yet, she cannot help but wonder. If all the things that
Addie has loved, she loved because of them—or him.
Luc stands, oﬀering his arm.
She does not take it.
They walk, side by side, through the Munich night, and
Addie still feels buoyant in the wake of the opera, the voices
ringing through her like a bell.
But Luc’s question echoes, too.
Which of them are mine?
She looks at him, the elegant shape beside her in the
dark.
“What is the strangest deal you’ve ever done?”
Luc tips his head back, and considers. “Joan of Arc,” he
says. “A soul for a blessed sword, so that she could not be
struck down.”
Addie frowns. “But she was.”
480

“Ah, but not in battle.” Luc’s smile goes sly. “Semantics
may seem small, Adeline, but the power of a deal is in its
wording. She asked for the protection of a god while it was
in her hands. She did not ask for the ability to keep hold of
it.”
Addie shakes her head, bemused.
“I refuse to believe that Joan of Arc made a deal with the
dark.”
The smile splits, showing teeth. “Well, perhaps I let her
believe I was a little more … angelic? But deep down, I think
she knew. Greatness requires sacriﬁce. Who you sacriﬁce to
matters less than what you sacriﬁce for. And in the end, she
became what she wanted to be.”
“A martyr?”
“A legend.”
Addie shakes her head. “But the artists. Think of all they
could have done. Don’t you mourn their loss?”
Luc’s face darkens. And she remembers his mood the
night he met her in the National, remembers his ﬁrst words,
in Beethoven’s room.
What a waste.
“Of course I do,” he says. “But all great art comes with a
cost.” He looks away. “You should know that. After all, we
are both patrons, in our way.”
“I am nothing like you,” she says, but there is not much
venom in the words. “I am a muse, and you are a thief.”
He shrugs. “Give and take,” he says, and nothing more.
But when it’s late, and he is gone, and she is left to
wander, the opera plays on, perfectly preserved inside the
prism of her memory, and Addie wonders, softly, silently, if
their souls were a fair price for such ﬁne art.

481

New York City
July 4, 2014

XIV
Lights explode over the city.
They’ve gathered on the roof of Robbie’s building along
with twenty other people to watch the ﬁreworks go oﬀ, paint
the Manhattan skyline pink and green and gold.
Addie and Henry stand together, of course, but it’s too
hot to touch. His glasses keep fogging, and he seems less
interested in drinking his beer than holding the can against
his neck.
A breeze trickles through the air, carrying as much relief
as a dryer vent, and everyone on the roof make
exaggerated noises, letting out oohs and ahhs that might be
for the ﬁreworks, or simply the limp gust of air.
A kiddie pool sits in the center of the roof surrounded by
lawn chairs, a huddle of people sloshing their feet in the
tepid water.
The ﬁreworks ﬁnish, and Addie looks around for Henry,
but he’s wandered oﬀ.
He’s been in a strange mood all day, but she assumes it’s
the heat, sitting like a weight on everything. The bookstore
was closed, and they spent most of the day stretched
together on the sofa in front of a box fan, Book pawing at an
ice cube as they watched TV, the heat enough to temper
even Henry’s manic energy.
She was too tired to tell him stories.

482

He was too tired to write them down.
The rooftop doors burst open and Robbie appears, looking
as if he’s raided an ice-cream truck, his arms full of melting
ice pops. People whoop and cheer, and he makes his rounds
of the roof, doling out once-frozen treats.
Twelfth time’s the charm, she thinks as he hands her a
fruit bar, but even though he doesn’t remember her,
Henry’s obviously said enough, or perhaps Robbie simply
recognizes everyone else, and makes the deduction.
One of these things is not like the others.
Addie doesn’t lose a second. She breaks into a sudden
grin. “Oh my god, you must be Robbie.” She throws her
arms around his neck. “Henry’s told me all about you.”
Robbie pulls free. “Did he?”
“You’re the actor. He said you’re amazing. That it’s only a
matter of time before you’re on Broadway.” Robbie blushes
a little, looks away. “I’d love to come to one of your shows.
What are you performing in right now?”
Robbie hesitates, but she can feel him faltering, torn
between shunning her and sharing his news. “We’re doing a
spin on Faust,” he says. “You know, man makes a deal with
the devil…”
Addie bites into the ice pop, sending a wave of shock
through her teeth. It is enough to mask the grimace as
Robbie goes on.
“But it’s going to be set against a stage that’s more
Labyrinth. Think Mephistopheles but by way of the Goblin
King.” He gestures at himself when he says it. “It’s a really
cool spin. The costumes are amazing. Anyway, it doesn’t
open until September.”
“It sounds wonderful,” she says. “I can’t wait to see.”
At that, Robbie almost smiles. “I think it will be pretty
cool.”
“To Faust,” she says, lifting her ice pop.

483

“And the devil,” answers Robbie.
Her hands have gone sticky, and she dunks them in the
kiddie pool and goes in search of Henry. She ﬁnally ﬁnds him
alone in a corner of the roof, a stretch where the lights don’t
reach. He’s staring out—not up, but down over the edge.
“I think I ﬁnally cracked Robbie,” she says, wiping her
hands on her shorts.
“Hm?” he says, not really listening. A bead of sweat runs
down his cheek, and he closes his eyes into the faint
summer breeze and sways a little on his feet.
Addie pulls him away from the edge. “What’s wrong?”
His eyes are dark, and for a moment, he looks haunted,
lost.
“Nothing,” he says softly. “Just thinking.”
Addie has lived long enough to recognize a lie. Lying is its
own language, like the language of seasons, or gestures, or
the shade of Luc’s eyes.
So she knows that Henry is lying to her now.
Or at least, he’s not telling her the truth.
And maybe it is just one of his storms, she thinks. Maybe
it is the summer heat.
It is not, of course, and later, she will know the truth, and
she will wish she’d asked, wish she’d pressed, wish she’d
known.
Later—but tonight, he pulls her close. Tonight, he kisses
her, deeply, hungrily, as if he can make her forget what she
saw.
And Addie lets him try.

That night, when they get home, it is too hot to think, to
sleep, so they ﬁll the bathtub with cold water, turn oﬀ the
lights, and climb inside, shivering at the sudden, merciful
relief.
484

They lie there in the dark, bare legs intertwined beneath
the water. Henry’s ﬁngers play a melody across her knee.
“When we ﬁrst met,” he muses, “why didn’t you tell me
your real name?”
Addie looks up at the darkened ceiling tiles, and sees
Isabelle as she was, that last day, sitting at the table, her
eyes gone empty. She sees Remy in the café, staring
dreamily past her words, unable to hear them.
“Because I didn’t think I could,” she says, running her
ﬁngers through the water. “When I try to tell people the
truth, their faces just go blank. When I try to say my name,
it always gets stuck in my throat.” She smiles. “Except with
you.”
“But why?” he asks. “If you’re going to be forgotten, what
does it matter if you tell the truth?”
Addie closes her eyes. It’s a good question, one she’s
asked herself a hundred times. “I think he wanted to erase
me. To make sure I felt unseen, unheard, unreal. You don’t
really realize the power of a name until it’s gone. Before
you, he was the only one who could say it.”
The voice curls like smoke inside her head.
Oh Adeline.
Adeline, Adeline.
My Adeline.
“What an asshole,” says Henry, and she chuckles,
remembering the nights she screamed up at the sky, called
the darkness so much worse.
And then he asks, “When’s the last time you saw him?”
and Addie falters.
For an instant, she is in a bed, black silk sheets twisted
around her limbs, the New Orleans heat oppressive even in
the dark. But Luc is a cool weight, wrapped around her
limbs, his teeth skating along her shoulder as he whispers
the word against her skin.

485

Surrender.
Addie swallows, pushes the memory down like bile in her
throat.
“Almost thirty years ago,” she says, as if she doesn’t
count the days. As if the anniversary isn’t rushing up to
meet them.
She glances sideways at the clothes piled on the
bathroom ﬂoor, the indent of the wooden ring in the pocket
of her shorts. “We had a falling-out,” she says, and it is the
barest version of the truth.
Henry looks at her, clearly curious, but he doesn’t ask
what happened, and for that, she is grateful.
There is an order to the story.
She will tell him when she gets there.
For now Addie reaches up, and turns the shower on, and it
falls down on them like rain, soothing and steady. And this is
the perfect kind of silence. Easy, and empty. They sit across
from each other beneath the icy stream, and Addie closes
her eyes and tips her head back against the tub, and listens
to the makeshift storm.

486

The Cotswolds, England
December 31, 1899

XV
It is snowing.
Not a patina of frost, or a few wayward ﬂakes, but a
dousing of white.
Addie sits curled in the window of the little cottage, a ﬁre
at her back, and a book open on her knee, as she watches
the sky fall.
She has ushered in the change of years so many ways.
Perched on London rooftops holding bottles of
Champagne, and torch in hand through the cobbled roads of
Edinburgh. She has danced in the halls of Paris, and
watched the sky go white with ﬁreworks in Amsterdam. She
has kissed strangers, and sung of friends she’ll never meet.
Gone out with bangs and with whispers.
But tonight she is content to sit, and watch the world go
white beyond the window, every line and curve erased by
snow.
The cottage is not hers, of course. Not in the strictest
sense.
She found it more or less intact, a place abandoned, or
simply forgotten. The furniture was threadbare, the
cupboards almost empty. But she has had a season to make
it hers, to gather wood from the copse of trees across the
ﬁeld. To tend the wild garden, and steal what she could not
grow.

487

It is simply a place to rest her bones.
Outside, the storm has stopped.
The snow lies quiet on the ground. As smooth and clean
as unmarked paper.
Perhaps that is what drives her to her feet.
She pulls the cloak tight around her shoulders and surges
out, boots sinking instantly into the snow. It is light, whipped
into a sugar ﬁlm, the taste of winter on her tongue.
Once, when she was ﬁve, or six, it snowed back in Villon.
A rare sight, a ﬁlm of white several inches deep that coated
everything. In hours, it was ruined by horses and carts, and
people trudging to and fro, but Addie found a small expanse
of untouched white. She rushed out into it, leaving a trail of
shoes. She ran bare hands over the frozen sheets, left
ﬁngers in her wake. She ruined every inch of the canvas.
And when she was done, she looked around at the ﬁeld,
now covered in tracks, and mourned that it was over. The
next day, the frost broke, and the ice melted, and it was the
last time she played in snow.
Until now.
Now, her steps crunch the perfect snow, and it rises in her
wake.
Now, she runs her ﬁngers through the gentle hills, and
they smooth behind her touch.
Now she plays in the ﬁeld, and does not leave a mark.
The world remains unblemished, and for once she is
grateful.
She spins and twirls, and dances partner-less across the
snow, laughing at the strange and simple magic of the
moment, before stepping wrong, a patch deeper than she
thought.
She loses her balance, and crashes down into the pile of
white, gasping at the sudden cold along her collar, the snow
that creeps inside her hood. She looks up. It has begun to

488

snow again, lightly now, ﬂakes falling like stars. The world
goes muﬄed, a cotton kind of quiet. And if it were not for
the icy damp leaching through her clothes, she thinks she
could stay here forever.
She decides she will at least stay here for now.
She sinks into the snow, lets it swallow the edges of her
sight, until there is nothing but a frame around the open
sky, the night cold and clear and full of stars. And she is ten
again, stretched in the tall grass behind her father’s
workshop, dreaming she is anywhere but home.
How strange, the winding way a dream comes true.
But now, gazing up into the endless dark, she does not
think of freedom, but of him.
And then, he’s there.
Standing over her, haloed by the dark, and she thinks
perhaps she is going mad again. It would not be the ﬁrst
time.
“Two hundred years,” Luc says, kneeling beside her, “and
still behaving like a child.”
“What are you doing here?”
“I could ask the same of you.”
He holds out his hand, and she takes it, lets him draw her
up out of the cold, and together they walk back to the little
house, leaving only his steps in the snow.
Inside, the ﬁre has gone out, and she groans a little
herself, reaching for the lantern, hoping it will be enough to
coax the ﬁre back to life.
But Luc only looks at the smoking ruins and ﬂicks his
ﬁngers in an absent way, and the ﬂames surge up inside the
hearth, a bloom of heat, casting shadows over everything.
How easily he moves through the world, she thinks.
How hard he’s made it for her.
Luc considers the little cottage, the borrowed life. “My
Adeline,” he says, “still longing to grow up and become

489

Estele.”
“I am not yours,” she says, though by now the words
have lost their venom.
“All the world, and you pass your time playing the part of
a witch in the wild, a crone praying to old gods.”
“I did not pray to you. And yet you’re here.”
She takes him in, dressed in a wool coat and cashmere
scarf, the collar high against his cheeks, and realizes this is
the ﬁrst she has seen Luc in winter. It suits him, as well as
summer did. The fair skin of his cheeks gone marble white,
the black curls the color of the moonless sky. Those green
eyes, as cold and bright as stars. And the way he looks,
standing before the ﬁre, she wishes she could draw him.
Even after all this time, her ﬁngers itch for charcoal.
He runs a hand over the mantel.
“I saw an elephant, in Paris.”
Her words to him, so many years before. It is such a
strange answer now, ﬁlled with unspoken things. I saw an
elephant, and thought of you. I was in Paris, and you were
not.
“And you thought of me,” she says.
It is a question. He does not answer. Instead, he looks
around and says, “This is a pitiful way to usher out a year.
We can do better. Come with me.”
And she is curious—she is always curious—but tonight,
she shakes her head. “No.”
That proud chin lifts. Those dark brows draw together.
“Why not?”
Addie shrugs. “Because I’m happy here. And I do not trust
you to bring me back.”
His smile ﬂickers, like ﬁrelight. And she expects that to be
the end of that.
To turn and ﬁnd him gone, stolen back into the dark.
But he’s still there, this shadow in her borrowed home.

490

He lowers himself into the second chair.
He conjures cups of wine from nothing, and they sit
before the ﬁre like friends, or at least, like foes at rest, and
he tells her of Paris at the close of a decade—the turn of the
century. Of the writers, blooming like ﬂowers, of the art, and
the music, and the beauty. He has always known how to
tempt her. He says it is a golden age, a time of light.
“You would enjoy it,” he says.
“I’m sure I would.”
She will go, in the spring, and see the World’s Fair,
witness the Eiﬀel Tower, the iron sculpture climbing toward
the sky. She will walk through buildings made of glass,
ephemeral installations, and everyone will talk of the old
century and the new one, as if there is a line in the sand
between present and past. As if it does not all exist
together.
History is a thing designed in retrospect.
For now, she listens to him talk, and it is enough.
She does not remember drifting oﬀ, but when she wakes,
it is early in the morning, and the cottage is empty, the ﬁre
little more than embers. A blanket has been cast over her
shoulders, and beyond the window, the world is white again.
And Addie will wonder if he was ever there.

491

492

PART SIX
DO NOT PRETEND THAT THIS IS
LOVE

493

Title: “Dream Girl”
Artist: Toby Marsh
Date: 2014
Medium: sheet music
Location: on loan from the Pershing family
Description: This piece of original sheet music, signed by
singer/songwriter Toby Marsh, captures the beginnings of the song
“Dream Girl” and was auctioned oﬀ as part of the Music Notes annual
gala to fund public school arts programs in New York City. While some of
the lyrics diﬀer from the ﬁnal song, the most famous lines—“I’m so
afraid, afraid that I’ll forget/Her, even though I’ve only met her in my
dreams”—are clearly legible in the center of the page.
Background: This is largely considered to be the song that launched
Marsh’s career. The musician has only added to the mythology
surrounding the subject by claiming the song came to him over the
course of several dreams. “I would wake up with bars of music in my
head,” he said in a 2016 interview with Paper Magazine. “I’d ﬁnd lyrics
scribbled on notepads and receipts, but I had no memory of writing
them. It was like sleepwalking. Sleep-making. The whole thing was a
dream.”
Marsh denies being under the inﬂuence of any drugs at the time.
Estimated Value: $15,000

494

Villon-sur-Sarthe
July 29, 1914

I
It is pouring in Villon.
The Sarthe swells against its banks, and the rain turns
footpaths into muddy rivers. It spills over doorways, ﬁlls her
ears with the steady white noise of rushing water, and when
Addie closes her eyes, the years dissolve, and she is ten
again, she is ﬁfteen, she is twenty, her skirts wet and hair
ﬂying behind her as she races barefoot through a
countryside washed clean.
But then she opens her eyes again, and it has been two
hundred years, and she cannot deny that the little village of
Villon has changed. She recognizes less and less, ﬁnds more
and more strange. Here and there she can still make out the
place that she once knew, but her memories are threadbare,
those years before her deal left to weather and fade.
And yet, some things are constant.
The stretch of road that runs through the town.
The small church sitting in the center.
The low wall of the graveyard, immune to the slow
procession of change.
Addie lingers in the chapel doorway, watching the storm.
She had an umbrella when she started out, but a sharp gust
of wind bent the frame, and she knows she should wait for
the rain to ease, that she has only the one dress. But as she
stands there, one hand held out to cup the falling water, she

495

thinks of Estele, who used to stand beneath the storms,
arms wide and welcoming.
Addie abandons her shelter and heads for the cemetery
gate.
In moments, she is soaked, but the rain is warm, and she
will hardly melt. She passes a few new headstones, and
many old, sets a wild rose on each of her parents’ graves,
and goes to ﬁnd Estele.
She has missed the old woman these many years, missed
her comfort, and her counsel, missed the strength of her
grip, and her woody laugh, and the way she believed in
Addie when she was Adeline, when she was still here, still
human. And even though she holds on to what she can,
Estele’s voice has all but vanished with the passing years.
This is the only place she can still conjure it, her presence
felt in the old stones, the weedy earth, the weathered tree
over her head.
But the tree is not there.
The grave slumps, weary, in its plot, the stone moldering
and cracked, but the beautiful tree, with its wide limbs and
its deep roots, is gone.
Nothing but a jagged stump remains.
Addie lets out an audible gasp, sinking to her knees, runs
her hands over the dead and splintered wood. No. No, not
this. She has lost so much, and mourned it all before, but for
the ﬁrst time in years, she is struck with a loss so sharp it
steals her breath, her strength, her will.
Grief, deep as a well, opens inside her.
What is the point in planting seeds?
Why tend them? Why help them grow?
Everything crumbles in the end.
Everything dies.
And she is all that’s left, a solitary ghost hosting a vigil for
forgotten things. She squeezes her eyes shut and tries to

496

conjure Estele, tries to summon the old woman’s voice, so
she can tell her it will be all right, that it’s just wood—but
the voice is gone, lost beneath the raging storm.
Addie is still sitting there at dusk.
The rain has slowed to a drizzle, the occasional tap of
water against stone. She is soaked through, but she cannot
feel it anymore, cannot feel much of anything—until she
feels the shifting air, and the arrival of the shadow at her
back.
“I’m sorry,” he says, and it is the ﬁrst time she has ever
heard those words in that silken voice, the only time they
will ever sound honest.
“Did you do this?” she whispers without looking up.
And to her surprise, Luc kneels beside her on the sodden
earth. His own clothes do not seem to dampen.
“You cannot blame me for every loss,” he says.
She doesn’t realize she is shivering until his arm folds
around her shoulders, until she feels her limbs trembling
against the steady weight of his.
“I know I can be cruel,” he says. “But nature can be
crueler.”
It is obvious, now, the charred line along the center of the
stump. The swift, hot shear of lightning. It doesn’t ease the
loss.
She cannot stand to look upon the tree.
She cannot bear to linger here any longer.
“Come,” he says, drawing her to her feet, and she does
not know where they are going, and she does not care, so
long as it is somewhere else. Addie turns her back on the
ruined stump, the tombstone worn to nothing. Even rocks,
she thinks as she follows Luc away from the graveyard, and
the village, and the past.
She will never go back.

497

Paris, of course, has changed far more than Villon.
Over the years, she has seen it polished to a shine, white
stone buildings capped with charcoal roofs. Long windows
and iron balconies and wide avenues lined with ﬂower shops
and cafés beneath red awnings.
They sit on a patio, her dress drying in the summer
breeze, a bottle of port open between them. Addie drinks
deeply, trying to wash away the image of the tree, knowing
no amount of wine will cleanse her memories.
It doesn’t stop her from trying.
Somewhere along the Seine, a violin begins to play. Under
the high notes, she hears the tremor of a car’s engine. The
stubborn clop of a horse. The strange music of Paris.
Luc lifts his glass. “Happy anniversary, my Adeline.”
She looks at him, lips parting with their usual retort, but
then stops short. If she is his—then by now he must be hers
as well.
“Happy anniversary, my Luc,” she answers, just to see
the face he’ll make.
She is rewarded with a raised brow, the crooked upturn of
his mouth, the green of his eyes shifting in surprise.
Then Luc looks down, turns the glass of port between his
ﬁngers.
“You told me once that we were alike,” he says, almost to
himself. “Both of us … lonely. I loathed you for saying it. But
I suppose in some ways you were right. I suppose,” he goes
on slowly, “there is something to the idea of company.”
It is the closest he has ever come to sounding human.
“Do you miss me,” she asks, “when you are not here?”
Those green eyes drift up, the emerald even in the dark.
“I am here, with you, more often than you think.”
“Of course,” she says, “you come and go whenever you
want. I have no choice but to wait.”

498

His eyes darken with pleasure. “Do you wait for me?”
And now it is Addie who looks away. “You said it yourself.
We all crave company.”
“And if you could call on me, as I call on you?”
Her heart quickens a little.
She does not look up, and that is why she sees it, rolling
toward her on the table. A slim band, carved of pale ash
wood.
It is a ring.
It is her ring.
The gift she made to the dark that night.
The gift he scorned, and turned to smoke.
The image conjured in a seaside church.
But if it is an illusion now, it is an exceptional one. Here,
the notch where her father’s chisel bit a fraction too deep.
There, the curve rubbed smooth as stone by years of
worrying.
It is real. It must be real. And yet—
“You destroyed it.”
“I took it,” says Luc, looking over his glass. “That is not
the same thing.”
Anger ﬂares in her. “You said it was nothing.”
“I said it was not enough. But I do not ruin beauty without
reason. It was mine, for a time, but it was always yours.”
Addie marvels at the ring. “What must I do?”
“You know how to summon gods.”
Estele’s voice, faint as a breeze.
You must humble yourself before them.
“Put it on, and I will come.” Luc leans back in his chair,
the night breeze blowing through those raven curls.
“There,” he says. “Now we are even.”
“We will never be even,” she says as she turns the ring
over between ﬁnger and thumb, and decides she will not
use it.

499

It is a challenge. A game, parading as a gift. Not a war so
much as a wager. A battle of wills. For her to don the ring, to
call on Luc, would be to fold, to admit defeat.
To surrender.
She slips the token into the pocket of her skirts, forces her
ﬁngers to let go of the talisman.
Only then does she notice the tension in the air that
night. It is an energy she’s felt before, but cannot place,
until Luc says, “There is about to be a war.”
She had not heard. He tells her of the archduke’s
assassination, his face a mask of grim displeasure.
“I hate war,” he says darkly.
“I would have thought you fond of conﬂict.”
“The aftermath breeds art,” he says. “But war makes
believers out of cynics. Sycophants desperate for salvation,
everyone suddenly clinging to their souls, clutching them
close like a matron with her ﬁnest pearls.” Luc shakes his
head. “Give me back the Belle Epoque.”
“Who knew gods were so nostalgic?”
Luc ﬁnishes his drink, and rises. “You should leave, before
it starts.” Addie laughs. It sounds almost as if he cares. The
ring sits, a sudden weight in her pocket. He holds out his
hand. “I can take you.”
She should have accepted, should have said yes. Should
have let him lead her through the horrible dark and out
again, and saved herself an ocean, a miserable week
stowing away in the belly of a ship at sea, the beauty of the
water tarnished by the unending nature of it.
But she has learned too well to hold her ground.
Luc shakes his head. “You are still a stubborn fool.”
She toys with staying, but after he is gone, she cannot
help but conjure the shadows in his gaze, the grim way he
spoke of the coming strife. It is a sign, when even gods and
devils dread a ﬁght.

500

A week later, Addie caves, and boards a ship for New
York.
By the time she docks, the world is already at war.

501

New York City
July 29, 2014

II
It is just another day.
That is what Addie tells herself.
It is just a day—like all the others—but of course, it is not.
It is three hundred years since she was meant to be
married—a future given against her will.
Three hundred years since she knelt in the woods, and
summoned the darkness, and lost everything but freedom.
Three hundred years.
There should be a storm, an eclipse. Some way to mark
the monument of it.
But the day dawns perfect, and cloudless, and blue.
The bed is empty beside her, but she can hear the soft
shuﬄe of Henry moving through the kitchen, and she must
have been gripping the blankets, because her ﬁngers ache,
a knot of pain in the center of her left palm.
When she opens her hand, the wooden ring falls out.
She brushes it oﬀ the bed as if it were a spider, an ill
omen, listens to it land, and bounce, and roll away across
the hardwood ﬂoor. Addie draws up her knees, and lets her
head fall forward on them, and breathes into the space
between her ribs, and reminds herself it is just a ring, and it
is just a day. But there is a rope inside her chest, a dull
dread winding tighter, telling her to go, to put as much

502

distance between her and Henry as possible, in case he
comes.
He won’t, she tells herself.
It’s been so long, she tells herself.
But she doesn’t want to take the chance.
Henry’s knuckles rap on the open door, and she looks up
to see him holding a plate with a donut, three candles stuck
into the top.
And despite everything, she laughs. “What’s this?”
“Hey, it’s not every day that your girlfriend turns three
hundred.”
“It’s not my birthday.”
“I know, but I didn’t exactly know what to call it.”
And just like that, the voice rises like smoke inside her
head.
Happy anniversary, my love.
“Make a wish,” says Henry.
Addie swallows, and blows the candles out.
He sinks onto the bed beside her. “I’ve got the whole
day,” he says. “Bea’s covering at the store, and I thought
we could take the train out to…” But he trails oﬀ when he
sees her face. “What?”
Dread claws at her stomach, deeper than hunger. “I don’t
think we should be together,” she says. “Not today.”
His face falls. “Oh.”
Addie cups his cheek, and lies. “It’s just a day, Henry.”
“You’re right,” he says. “It’s a day. But how many of them
has he ruined? Don’t let him take it from you.” He kisses
her. “From us.”
If Luc ﬁnds them together, he will take more than that.
“Come on,” insists Henry, “I’ll have you back long before
you turn into a pumpkin. And then, if you want to spend the
night apart, I understand. Worry about him in the dark, but

503

it’s hours until then, and you deserve a good day. A good
memory.”
And he’s right. She does.
The dread loosens a little in her chest.
“Okay,” she says, one little word, and Henry’s whole face
lights with pleasure. “What do you have in mind?”
He disappears into the bathroom, reemerges in a pair of
yellow swim trunks, a towel cast over one shoulder. He
tosses her a blue-and-white bikini.
“Let’s go.”

Rockaway Beach is a sea of colored towels, and ﬂags
planted in the sand.
Laughter rolls in with the tide as kids make castle mounds
and people lounge beneath the glaring sun. Henry stretches
their towels out on a narrow patch of unclaimed sand,
weights them down with shoes, and then Addie grabs his
hand and they run down the beach, the soles of their feet
stinging until they hit the damp line of the tide and plunge
into the water.
Addie gasps at the welcome brush of the waves, cool
even in the heat of summer, and wades out until the ocean
wraps around her waist. Henry ducks his head beside her,
and comes back up, water dripping from his glasses. He
pulls her to him, kisses the salt from her ﬁngers. She slicks
the hair from his face. They linger there, tangled together in
the surf.
“See,” he says, “isn’t this better?”
And it is.
It is.
They swim until their limbs ache, and their skin begins to
prune, and then retreat to the towels waiting on the beach,
and stretch out to dry beneath the sun. It’s too hot to stay
504

there long, and soon the scent of food wafting from the
boardwalk is enough to draw them up again.
Henry gathers his stuﬀ and starts up the beach, and
Addie rises to follow, shaking the sand from her towel.
And out falls the wooden ring.
It lies there, a fraction darker than the beach, like a drop
of rain on a dry sidewalk. A reminder. Addie crouches down
before it, and sweeps a handful of sand over the top, before
jogging after Henry.
They head for the stretch of bars overlooking the beach,
order tacos and a pitcher of frozen margaritas, savoring the
tang and the sweet-salted chill. Henry wipes the water from
his glasses, and Addie looks out at the ocean, and feels the
past fold over the present, like the tides.
Déjà vu. Déjà su. Déjà vecu.
“What is it?” asks Henry.
Addie glances toward him. “Hm?”
“You get this look on your face,” he says, “when you’re
remembering.”
Addie looks back out at the Atlantic, the inﬁnite hem of
the beach, the memories spooling out along the horizon.
And as they eat, she tells him of all the coasts she’s seen, of
the time she ferried across the English Channel, the White
Cliﬀs of Dover rising from the fog. Of the time she sailed the
coast of Spain, a stowaway in the bowels of a stolen boat,
and how, when she crossed to America, the whole ship fell
ill, and she had to feign sickness so they wouldn’t think she
was a witch.
And when she gets tired of talking, and they have both
run out of drinks, they spend the next few hours bouncing
between the shade of the concession stands and the cool
kiss of the surf, lingering on the sand only long enough to
dry.
The day goes by too fast, as good days do.

505

And when it’s time to go, they make their way to the
subway, and sink onto the bench, sun-drunk and sleepy, as
the train pulls away.
Henry takes out a book, but Addie’s eyes are stinging,
and she leans against him, savoring his sun-and-paper
scent, and the seat is plastic and the air is stale, and she
has never been so comfortable. She feels herself sinking
into Henry, head lolling on his shoulder.
And then he whispers three words into her hair.
“I love you,” he says, and Addie wonders if this is love,
this gentle thing.
If it is meant to be this soft, this kind.
The diﬀerence between heat, and warmth.
Passion, and contentment.
“I love you too,” she says.
She wants it to be true.

506

Chicago, Illinois
July 29, 1928

III
There is an angel over the bar.
A stained-glass panel, lit from behind, with a single ﬁgure,
chalice raised and hand outstretched, as if calling you to
prayer.
But this is no church.
Speakeasies are like weeds these days, springing up
between the stones of Prohibition. This one has no name,
save the angel with its cup, the number XII over the door—
twelve, the hour of midday, and of midnight—the velvet
curtains and chaises that lounge like sleepers round the
wooden ﬂoor, the masks given to the patrons at the door.
It is, like most of them, only a rumor, a secret passed
from mouth to liquored mouth.
And Addie loves it.
There is a wild fervor to this place.
She dances—sometimes alone, and sometimes in the
company of strangers. Loses herself in the jazz that rocks
against the walls, rebounds, ﬁlling the crowded space with
music. She dances, until the feathers of her mask cling to
her cheeks, and Addie is breathless, and ﬂushed, and only
then does she retreat, falling into a leather chair.
It is almost midnight, and her ﬁngers drift like the hands
of a clock up to her throat, where the ring hangs on a silver
cord, the wooden band warm against her skin.

507

It is always within reach.
Once, when the cord snapped, she thought it lost, only to
ﬁnd it safe within the pocket of her blouse. Another time,
she left it on a windowsill, and found it hours later at her
neck again.
The only thing she doesn’t lose.
She toys with it, a lazy habit now, like curling a lock of
hair around one ﬁnger. She skims the edge of the band with
her nail, twirls it, careful to never let the ring slide over her
knuckle.
She has reached for it a hundred times: when she was
lonely, when she was bored, when she saw a thing of beauty
and thought of him. But she is too stubborn, and he is too
proud, and she is determined to win this round.
Fourteen years she has resisted the urge to put it on.
And fourteen years he has not come.
So she was right—it is a game. Another kind of forfeit, a
lesser version of surrender.
Fourteen years.
And she is lonely, and a little drunk, and she wonders if
tonight will be the night she breaks. It would be a fall, but it
is not so great a height. Perhaps—perhaps— To occupy her
hands, she decides to get another drink.
She goes to the bar and orders a gin ﬁzz, but the whitemasked man sets instead a Champagne glass before her. A
single candied rose petal ﬂoats among the bubbles, and
when she asks, he nods at a shadow in a velvet booth. His
mask is made to look like branches, the leaves a perfect
frame for perfect eyes.
And Addie smiles at the sight of him.
She would be lying if she said it was nothing but relief. A
weight set down. A breath set free.
“I win,” she says, sinking into his booth.

508

And even though he folded ﬁrst, his eyes are bright with
triumph. “How so?”
“I didn’t call, and yet you came.”
His chin lifts, a study in disdain. “You assume I’m here for
you.”
“I forget,” she says, sliding into his smooth, low cadence.
“There are so many maddening humans around to swindle
out of their souls.”
A wry smile tugs at perfect lips. “I promise, Adeline, few
are as maddening as you.”
“Few?” she teases. “I’ll have to try harder.”
He lifts a glass, and tips it toward the bar. “The fact
remains, you have come to me. This place is mine.”
Addie looks around, and suddenly, it is obvious.
She sees the markings everywhere.
Realizes, for the ﬁrst time, that the angel above the bar
has no wings. That the curls rising around his face are black.
That the band she took for a halo might as well be
moonlight.
And she wonders what it was that drew her here the ﬁrst
time.
Wonders if they are like magnets, she and Luc.
If they have circled each other for so long that now they
share an orbit.
It will become a hobby of his, these kinds of clubs. He will
plant them in a dozen cities, tend them like gardens, and
grow them wild.
As plentiful as churches, he will say, and twice as popular.
And long after the days of Prohibition, they will still
ﬂourish, catering to many tastes, and she will wonder if it is
the energy that stokes him, or if they are a grooming ground
for souls. A place to ply, and pry, and promise. And in a way,
a place to pray, albeit a diﬀerent kind of worship.
“So you see,” says Luc, “perhaps I win.”

509

Addie shakes her head. “It is only chance,” she says. “I
did not call.”
He smiles, gaze falling to the ring against her skin. “I
know your heart. I felt it falter.”
“But I didn’t.”
“No,” he says, the word nothing but a breath. “But I was
tired of waiting.”
“So you missed me,” she says with a smile, and there is
the briefest glimpse in those green eyes. A fracture of light.
“Life is long, and humans boring. You are better
company.”
“You forget that I am human.”
“Adeline,” he says, a shade of pity in his voice. “You have
not been human since the night we met. You will never be
human again.”
Heat ﬂushes through her at the words. No longer pleasant
warmth, but anger.
“I am still human,” she says, voice tightening around the
words as if they were her name.
“You move among them like a ghost,” he says, his
forehead bowing against hers, “because you are not one of
them. You cannot live like them. You cannot love like them.
You cannot belong with them.”
His mouth hovers over her own, his voice dropping to
nothing but a breeze.
“You belong to me.”
There is a sound like thunder in the back of his throat.
“With me.”
And when she looks up into his eyes, she sees a new
shade of green, and knows exactly what it is. The color of a
man oﬀ-balance. His chest rises and falls as if it were a
human thing.
Here is a place to put the knife.
“I would rather be a ghost.”

510

And for the ﬁrst time, the darkness ﬂinches. Draws back
like shadows in the face of light. His eyes go pale with
anger, and there is the god she knows, the monster she has
learned to face.
“Suit yourself,” mutters Luc, and she waits for him to
bleed into the dark, braces for the sudden, reaching void,
expects to be swallowed up and spit out on the other side of
the world.
But Luc does not vanish, and neither does she.
He nods at the club. “Go on, then,” he says, “go back to
them.”
And she would rather he had banished her. Instead, she
rises, even though she’s lost her taste for drinks, for
dancing, for any kind of company.
It is like stepping out of sunlight, the humid room gone
cold against her skin, as he sits there in his velvet booth,
and she goes through the motions of her night, and for the
ﬁrst time she feels the space between the humans and
herself, and fears that he is right.
In the end, she is the one to leave.
And the next day, the speakeasy is boarded up, and Luc is
gone. And just like that, new lines are drawn, the pieces set,
the battle started.
She will not see him again until the war.

511

New York City
July 29, 2014

IV
The A train jostles Addie out of sleep.
She opens her eyes just as the lights overhead ﬂicker and
go out, plunging the car into darkness. Panic surges like a
current through her chest, the world beyond the windows
dark, but Henry’s hand squeezes hers.
“It’s just the line,” he says, as the lights come on again,
and the train settles back into its easy motion, and she
realizes when the voice comes on the intercom that they’re
back in Brooklyn, the last stretch of subway underground
again, and when they get oﬀ, the sun is still safely in the
sky.
They walk back to Henry’s, heat-logged and drowsy,
shower oﬀ the salt and sand, and collapse on top of the
sheets, wet hair cooling on their skin. Book curls around her
feet. Henry pulls her against him, and the bed is cool, and
he is warm, and if it is not love, it is enough.
“Five minutes,” he mumbles in her hair.
“Five minutes,” she answers, the words half plea, half
promise as she curls into him.
Outside, the sun hovers over the buildings.
They still have time.

Addie wakes in the dark.
512

When she closed her eyes, the sun was still high. Now,
the room is full of shadows, the sky a deep indigo bruise
beyond the window.
Henry is still asleep, but the room is too quiet, too still,
and dread rolls through Addie as she sits up.
She doesn’t say his name, doesn’t even think it as she
climbs to her feet, holding her breath as she steps out into
the darkened hall. She scans the living room, braced to see
him sitting on the sofa, long arms stretched along the
cushioned back.
Adeline.
But he’s not there.
Of course he’s not there.
It has been almost forty years.
He is not coming. And Addie is so tired of waiting for him.
She returns to the bedroom, sees Henry on his feet, his
hair a mess of loose black curls as he searches under the
pillows for his glasses.
“I’m sorry,” he says. “I should have set an alarm.” He
unzips a bag, puts a change of clothes inside. “I can stay at
Bea’s. I’ll—”
But Addie catches his hand. “Don’t go.”
Henry hesitates. “Are you sure?”
She isn’t sure of anything, but she has had such a good
day, she doesn’t want to waste her night, doesn’t want to
give it to him.
He has taken enough.
There’s no food in the apartment, so they get dressed and
head over to the Merchant, and there’s a sleepy ease to all
of it, the disorientation of waking after dark added to the
eﬀects of so long in the sun. It lends everything a dreamy
air, the perfect end to a perfect day.
They tell the waitress they’re celebrating, and when she
asks if it’s a birthday, or an engagement, Addie lifts her beer

513

and says, “Anniversary.”
“Congrats,” says the waitress. “How many years?”
“Three hundred,” she says.
Henry chokes on his drink, and the waitress laughs,
assuming it’s an inside joke. Addie simply smiles.
A song comes on, the kind that rises above the noise, and
she drags him to his feet.
“Dance with me,” she says, and Henry tries to tell her
that he doesn’t dance, even though she was there, at the
Fourth Rail, when they ﬂung themselves into the beat, and
he says that is diﬀerent, but she doesn’t believe him,
because times change, but everyone dances, she has seen
them do the waltz and the quadrille, the fox-trot and the
jive, and a dozen others, and she is sure that he can
manage at least one of them.
And so she draws him between the tables, and Henry
didn’t even know that the Merchant had a dance ﬂoor, but
there it is, and they are the only ones on it. Addie shows him
how to lift his hand, to move with her in mirror motions. She
shows him how to lead, how to twirl her, how to dip. She
shows him where to put his hands, and how to feel the
rhythm in her hips, and for a little while, everything is
perfect, and easy, and right.
They stumble, laughing, up to the bar for another drink.
“Two beers,” says Henry, and the bartender nods, and
steps away, comes back a minute later, and sets down their
drinks.
But only one is a beer.
The other is Champagne, a candied rose petal ﬂoating in
the center.
Addie feels the world tip, the darkness tunnel.
There is a note beneath the glass, written in elegant,
sloping French.
For my Adeline.

514

“Hey,” Henry is saying, “we didn’t order this.”
The bartender points to the end of the bar. “Compliments
of the gentleman over…” he starts, trailing oﬀ. “Huh,” he
says. “He was just there.”
Addie’s heart tumbles in her chest. She grabs Henry’s
hand. “You have to go.”
“What? Wait—”
But there is no time. She pulls him toward the door.
“Addie.”
Luc cannot see them together, he cannot know that they
have found—
“Addie.” She ﬁnally looks back. And feels the world drop
out beneath her.
The bar is perfectly still.
Not empty, no; it is still brimming with people.
But none of them are moving.
They have all stopped mid-stride, mid-speech, mid-sip.
Not frozen, exactly, but forcibly stilled. Puppets, hovering on
strings. The music is still playing; softly, now, but it is the
only sound in the place besides Henry’s unsteady breath,
and the pounding of her heart.
And a voice, rising from the dark.
“Adeline.”
The whole world holds its breath, reduces to the soft echo
of footfalls on the wooden ﬂoor, the ﬁgure stepping out of
the shadows.
Forty years, and there he is, unchanged in the ways she is
unchanged, the same raven curls, the same emerald eyes,
the same coy twist to his cupid’s bow mouth. He’s dressed
in a black button-down, the sleeves of his shirt rolled to the
elbows, a suit jacket ﬂung over one shoulder, his other hand
hooked loosely in the pocket of his slacks.
The picture of ease.
“My love,” he says, “you’re looking well.”

515

Something in her loosens at the sound of his voice, the
way it always has. Something at the center of her unwinds,
release without relief. Because she has waited, of course
she has waited, held her breath in dread as much as hope.
Now it rushes from her lungs.
“What are you doing here?”
Luc has the nerve to look aﬀronted. “It’s our anniversary.
Surely you haven’t forgotten.”
“It’s been forty years.”
“Whose fault is that?”
“Yours, entirely.”
A smile tugs at the edge of his mouth. And then his green
gaze slides toward Henry. “I suppose I should be ﬂattered by
the resemblance.”
Addie doesn’t rise to the bait. “He has nothing to do with
this. Send him away. He’ll forget.”
Luc’s smile drops away. “Please. You embarrass us both.”
He carves a slow circle around them, a tiger rounding on its
prey. “As if I don’t keep track of all my deals. Henry Strauss,
so desperate to be wanted. Sell your soul just to be loved.
What a ﬁne pair you two must make.”
“Then let us have it.”
A dark brow rises. “You think I mean to pull you apart?
Not at all. Time will do that soon enough.” He looks to
Henry. “Tick tock. Tell me, are you still counting your life in
days, or have you begun to measure it in hours? Or does
that only make it harder?”
Addie looks between them, reading the triumphant green
in Luc’s eyes, the color bleeding out of Henry’s face.
She does not understand.
“Oh, Adeline.”
The name draws her back.
“Humans live such short lives, don’t they? Some far
shorter than others. Savor the time you have left. And know,

516

it was his choice.”
With that, Luc turns on his heel and dissolves into the
dark.
In his wake, the bar shudders back into motion. Noise
surges through the space, and Addie stares at the shadows
until she’s sure they are empty.
Humans live such short lives.
She turns toward Henry, who’s no longer standing behind
her, but slumped in a chair.
Some far shorter than others.
His head is bowed, one hand clutching his wrist where the
watch would be. Where it is, somehow, again. She is sure he
didn’t put it on. Sure he wasn’t wearing it.
But there it is, shining like a cuﬀ around his wrist.
It was his choice.
“Henry,” she says, kneeling before him.
“I wanted to tell you,” he murmurs.
She pulls the watch toward herself, and studies the face.
Four months she’s been with Henry, and in that time, the
hour hand has crept from half past six to half past ten. Four
months, and four hours closer to midnight, and she always
assumed it would go around again.
A lifetime, he said, and she knew it was a lie.
It had to be.
Luc would never give another human so much time—not
after her.
She knew, she must have known. But she thought,
perhaps he’d sold his soul for ﬁfty, or thirty, or even ten—
that would have been enough.
But there are only twelve hours on a watch, only twelve
months in a year, and he wouldn’t, he couldn’t be so foolish.
“Henry,” she says, “how long did you ask for?”
“Addie,” he pleads, and for the ﬁrst time, her name
sounds wrong on his lips. It is cracked. It is breaking.

517

“How long?” she demands.
He is silent for a long time.
And then, at last, he tells her the truth.

518

New York City
September 4, 2013

V
A boy is sick of his broken heart.
Tired of his storm-ﬁlled brain.
So he drinks until he cannot feel the pieces scraping
together in his chest, until he cannot hear the thunder
rolling through his head. He drinks when his friends tell him
it will be all right. He drinks when they tell him it will pass.
He drinks until the bottle is empty and the world gets fuzzy
at the edges. It is not enough to ease the pain, so he leaves,
and they let him go.
And at some point, on the walk home, it begins to rain.
At some point, his phone goes oﬀ, and he doesn’t answer.
At some point, the bottle slips, and he cuts his hand.
At some point, he is outside his building, and he sinks
onto the stoop, and presses his palms against his eyes, and
tells himself it is just another storm.
But this time, it shows no signs of passing. This time,
there is no break in the clouds, no light on the horizon, and
the thunder in his head is so damn loud. So he takes a few
of his sister’s pills, those little pink umbrellas, but they are
still no match for the storm, and so he takes some of his
own, as well.
He leans back on the rain-slicked stairs, and looks up at
the place where the rooftop meets the sky, and wonders,

519

not for the ﬁrst time, how many steps from here to the
edge.
He isn’t sure when he decides to jump.
Perhaps he never does.
Perhaps he decides to go inside, and then he decides to
go upstairs, and when he reaches his door he decides to
keep going, and when he gets to the last door he decides to
step out onto the roof—and at some point, standing there in
the pouring rain, he decides he doesn’t want to decide
anymore.
Here is a straight path. A tarred stretch of empty asphalt,
nothing but steps between him and the edge. The pills are
catching up, dulling the pain and leaving behind a cotton
quiet that’s somehow even worse. His eyes drift shut, his
limbs are so heavy.
It is just a storm, he tells himself, but he is tired of looking
for shelter.
It is just a storm, but there is always another waiting in its
wake.
It is just a storm, just a storm—but tonight it is too much,
and he is not enough, and so he crosses the roof, doesn’t
slow until he can see over the side, doesn’t stop until the
tips of his shoes graze empty air.
And that is where the stranger ﬁnds him.
That is where the darkness makes an oﬀer.
Not for a lifetime—for a single year.
It will be easy to look back and wonder how he could have
done it, how he could have given away so much for so little.
But in the moment, shoes already skimming night, the
simple truth is that he would have sold his soul for less,
would have traded an entire life of this for just a day—an
hour, a minute, a moment—of peace.
Just to numb the pain inside his chest.
Just to quiet the storm inside his head.

520

He is so tired of hurting, so tired of being hurt. And that is
why, when the stranger holds out his hand, and oﬀers to
pull Henry back from the edge, there is no hesitation.
He simply says yes.

521

New York City
July 29, 2014

VI
Now it all makes sense.
He makes sense.
This boy, who could never sit still, never waste time,
never put oﬀ a single thing. This boy, who writes down
every word she says, so she’ll have something when he’s
gone, who doesn’t want to lose even a single day, because
he doesn’t have that many more.
This boy she’s falling in love with.
This boy, who will soon be gone.
“How?” she asks. “How could you give up so much for so
little?”
Henry looks up at her, his face hollow.
“In that moment,” he says, “I would have given it for
less.”
A year. It seemed like so long, once.
Now it is no time at all.
A year, and it is almost up, and all she can see is the
curve of Luc’s smile, the triumphant color of his eyes. They
were not clever, they were not lucky, they were not slipping
past his notice. He knew, of course he knew, and he let it
come to this.
He let her fall.
“Addie, please,” says Henry, but she is already up,
already moving across the bar.

522

He tries to grab her hand, but he is too late.
She is already out of reach.
Already gone.

Three hundred years.
She has survived three hundred years, and in those
centuries, there have been so many times when the ground
gave way, moments when she could not catch her balance
or her breath. When the world left her feeling lost, broken,
hopeless.
Standing outside her parents’ house, that night after the
deal.
On the docks in Paris, where she learned what a body was
worth.
Remy, pressing the coins into her palm.
Soaked through, at the ruined stump of Estele’s oak tree.
But in this moment, Addie isn’t lost, or broken, or
hopeless.
She is furious.
She shoves her hand into her pocket, and of course the
ring is there. It is always there. Grains of sand ﬂake from the
smooth wooden surface as Addie slides the band over her
knuckle.
It’s been forty years since she last wore it, but the ring
slips eﬀortlessly on.
She feels the wind, like a cool breath at her back, and
turns, expecting to ﬁnd Luc.
But the street is empty—empty, at least, of shadows and
promises and gods.
She twists the ring around her ﬁnger.
Nothing.
“Show yourself!” she shouts down the block.

523

Heads turn, but Addie doesn’t care. They’ll forget her
soon enough, and even if she weren’t a ghost, this is New
York, a place immune to the actions of a stranger in the
street.
“Dammit,” she swears. She wrenches the ring from her
ﬁnger, and hurls it down the road, hears it bounce, and roll.
And then the sound suddenly drops away. The nearest
streetlight ﬂickers out, and a voice comes from the dark.
“All these years, and you still have such a temper.”
Something brushes her neck, and then a silver thread,
thin as dew shine, the same one snapped so long ago,
shimmers on her collar.
Luc’s ﬁngers trail along her skin. “Have you missed me?”
She turns to shove him away, but her hands pass straight
through, and then he is behind her. When she tries a second
time, he is as solid and unyielding as rock.
“Undo it,” she snaps, striking his chest, but her ﬁst barely
grazes the front of his shirt before he takes her wrist.
“Who are you to give me orders, Adeline?”
She tries to pull free, but his grip is stone.
“You know,” he says, almost casually, “there was a time
when you groveled, pressed yourself against the damp
forest soil and pleaded for my intercession.”
“You want me to beg? Then ﬁne. I beg you. Please. Undo
it.”
He steps forward, forcing her to step back. “Henry made
his deal.”
“He didn’t know—”
“They always know,” says Luc. “They just don’t want to
accept the cost. The soul is the easiest thing to trade. It’s
the time no one considers.”
“Luc, please.”
His green eyes gleam, not with mischief, or triumph, but
power. The shade of someone who knows they’re in control.

524

“Why should I?” he asks. “Why would I?”
Addie has a dozen answers, but she scrambles to ﬁnd the
right words, the ones that might appease the dark, but
before she can ﬁnd them, Luc reaches out, and lifts her chin,
and she expects him to play out their old, tired lines, to
mock her, or ask for her soul, but he does neither.
“Spend the night with me,” he says. “Tomorrow. Let us
have a proper anniversary. Give me that, and I’ll consider
freeing Mr. Strauss from his obligations.” His mouth
twitches. “If, that is, you can persuade me.”
It is a lie, of course.
It is a trap, but Addie has no other choice.
“I accept,” she says, and the darkness smiles, and then
dissolves around her.
She stands on the sidewalk, alone, until her heart
steadies, and then walks back into the Merchant.
But Henry is gone.

She ﬁnds him at home, sitting in the dark.
He’s on the edge of the bed, the blankets still tangled
from their afternoon nap. He stares ahead, into the distance,
the way he did that summer night on the rooftop, after the
ﬁreworks.
And Addie realizes that she is going to lose him, the way
she has lost everyone.
And she doesn’t know if she can do it, not again, not this
time.
Hasn’t she lost enough?
“I’m sorry,” he whispers as she crosses to him.
“I’m so sorry,” he says, as she runs her ﬁngers through
his hair.
“Why didn’t you tell me?” she pleads.

525

Henry is quiet for a moment, and then he says, “How do
you walk to the end of the world?” He looks up at her. “I
wanted to hold on to every step.”
A soft, shuddering sigh.
“My uncle had cancer, when I was still in college. It was
terminal. The doctors gave him a few months, and he told
everyone, and do you know what they did? They couldn’t
handle it. They were so caught up in their grief, they
mourned him before he was even dead. There’s no way to
un-know the fact that someone is dying. It eats away all the
normal, and leaves something wrong and rotten in its place.
I’m sorry, Addie. I didn’t want you to look at me that way.”
She climbs into bed, and pulls him down beside her.
“I’m sorry,” he’s saying, soft and steady as a prayer.
They lie there, face-to-face, their ﬁngers intertwined.
“I’m sorry.”
And Addie forces herself to ask, “How long do you have
left?”
Henry swallows. “A month.”
The words land like a blow on tender skin.
“A little more,” he says. “Thirty-six days.”
“It’s after midnight,” Addie whispers.
Henry exhales. “Then thirty-ﬁve.”
Her grip tightens around his, and his tightens back, and
they hold on until it hurts, as if any minute someone might
try to pull them apart, as if the other might slip free, and
disappear.

526

Occupied France
November 23, 1944

VII
Her back hits the rough stone wall.
The cell grinds shut, and German soldiers laugh beyond
the bars as Addie slumps to the ﬂoor, coughing blood.
A handful of men huddle in one corner of the cell,
slouched and murmuring. At least they don’t seem to care
that she’s a woman. The Germans have noticed. Though
they caught her dressed in nondescript trousers and coat,
though she kept her hair pulled back, she knew by the way
they scowled and leered that they could tell her sex. She
told them in a dozen diﬀerent tongues what she would do if
they came near, and they laughed, and satisﬁed themselves
with beating her senseless.
Get up, she wills her weary body.
Get up, she wills her tired bones.
Addie forces herself to her feet, stumbles to the front of
the cell. She wraps her hands around the frozen steel, pulls
at it until her muscles scream, until the bars groan, but they
do not move. She pries at the bolts until her ﬁngers bleed,
and a soldier slams his hand against the bars and threatens
to use her body as kindling.
She is such a fool.
She is a fool for thinking it would work. For thinking that
forgettable was the same as invisible, that it would protect
her here.

527

She should have stayed in Boston, where the worst she
had to worry about was wartime rations and winter cold.
She should never have come back. It was foolish honor, and
stubborn pride. It was the last war, and the fact she ran
away, ﬂed across the Atlantic instead of facing the danger
at home. Because somehow, despite it all, that’s what
France will always be.
Home.
And somewhere along the way, she decided she could
help. Not in an oﬃcial sense, of course, but secrets have no
owner. They could be touched, and traded, by anyone, even
a ghost.
The only thing she had to do was not get caught.
Three years of ferrying secrets through Occupied France.
Three years, only to end up here.
In a prison outside Orleans.
And it does not matter that they will forget her face. It
does not matter, because these soldiers do not care about
remembering. Here, all the faces are strange, and foreign,
and nameless, and if she doesn’t get out, she is going to
disappear.
Addie sags back against the icy wall and pulls her ragged
jacket close. She closes her eyes. She does not pray, not
exactly, but she does think of him. She does, perhaps, even
wish that it were summer—a July night when he might ﬁnd
her on his own.
The soldiers have searched her, roughly, taken anything
she might use to hurt them, or escape. They have taken the
ring, too, snapped the leather cord it hung on, cast the
wooden band away.
And yet, when she riﬂes through her ragged clothing, it is
still there, waiting like a coin in the crease of her pocket.
She is grateful, then, that she cannot seem to lose it.
Grateful, as she lifts it to her ﬁnger.

528

For a moment, she falters—twenty-nine years she has had
the ring, with all its strings attached.
Twenty-nine years, and she hasn’t used it.
But right now, even Luc’s smug satisfaction would be
better than the eternity in a prison cell, or worse.
If he comes.
Those words, a whisper in the back of her mind. A fear
she cannot shake. Chicago rising like bile in her throat.
The anger in her chest. The venom in his eyes.
I would rather be a ghost.
She had been wrong.
She does not want to be this kind of ghost.
And so, for the ﬁrst time in centuries, Addie prays.
She slides the wooden band over her ﬁnger, and holds
her breath, expects to feel something, a stirring of magic, a
rush of wind.
But there is nothing.
Nothing, and she wonders if, after all this time, it was just
another trick, a way to lift her hopes, only to drop them, in
the chance they might shatter.
She has a curse ready on her tongue, when she feels the
breeze—not biting, but warm, cutting through the prison
cell, carrying the far-oﬀ scent of summer.
The men across the cell stop talking.
They slouch in their corner, awake but inert, staring oﬀ
into space, as if caught in the throes of some idea. Beyond
the cell, the soldiers’ boots stop sounding on the stones,
and the German voices drop away like a pebble down a well.
The world goes strangely, impossibly quiet.
Until the only sound is the soft, almost rhythmic tap of
ﬁngers trailing along bars.
She has not seen him since Chicago.
“Oh Adeline,” he says, hand drifting down the icy bars.
“What a state you’re in.”

529

She manages a small, pained laugh. “Immortality breeds
a high tolerance for risk.”
“There are things worse than death,” he says, as if she
does not already know.
He looks around at the prison, brow furrowed in disdain.
“Wars,” he mutters.
“Tell me you are not helping them.”
Luc almost looks oﬀended. “Even I have limits.”
“You bragged to me once about the successes of
Napoleon.”
He shrugs. “There is ambition, and there is evil. And as
much as I’d like to create a roster of my past exploits, your
life is the important one right now.” He leans his elbows on
the bars. “How do you plan to get out of this?”
She knows what he wants her to do. He wants her to beg.
As if donning the ring were not enough. As if he has not
already won this hand, this game. Her stomach knots, and
her bruised ribs ache, and she is so thirsty she could cry just
to have something to drink. But Addie cannot bring herself
to fold.
“You know me,” she says, with a tired smile. “I always ﬁnd
a way.”
Luc sighs. “Suit yourself,” he says, turning his back, and it
is too much; she cannot bear the thought of him leaving her
here, alone.
“Wait,” she calls desperately, pushing into the bars—only
to ﬁnd the lock undone, the cell door swinging open beneath
her weight.
Luc looks back over his shoulder, and he almost smiles,
turning toward her just enough to oﬀer up his hand.
She stumbles forward, out of the cell and into freedom,
into him. And for a moment, the embrace is only that, and
he is solid, and warm, folded around her in the dark, and it

530

would be easy to believe that he is real, that he is human,
that he is home.
But then the world cracks wide, and the shadows swallow
them whole.
The prison gives way to nothingness, to blackness, to the
wild dark. And when it parts, she is back in Boston, the sun
just beginning to set, and she could kiss the ground in sheer
relief. Addie pulls the jacket close around her, and sinks onto
the curb, legs shaking, the wooden band still wrapped
around her ﬁnger. She called, and he came. She asked, and
he answered. And she knows he will hold it over her, and
but right now, she does not care.
She does not want to be alone.
But by the time Addie looks up to thank him, he is gone.

531

New York City
July 30, 2014

VIII
Henry trails her through the apartment as she gets ready.
“Why would you agree to this?” he asks.
Because she knows the darkness better than anyone,
knows his mind if not his heart.
“Because I don’t want to lose you,” says Addie, pulling up
her hair.
Henry looks tired, hollowed out. “It’s too late,” he says.
But it’s not too late.
Not yet.
Addie reaches into her pocket and feels the ring where it
always is, waiting, the wood warm from being pressed
against her body. She draws it out, but Henry catches her
hand.
“Don’t do this,” he pleads.
“Do you want to die?” she asks, the words cutting through
the room.
He pulls back a little at the words. “No. But I made a
choice, Addie.”
“You made a mistake.”
“I made a deal,” he says. “And I’m sorry. I’m sorry I didn’t
ask for more time. I’m sorry I didn’t tell you the truth sooner.
But it is what it is.”
Addie shakes her head. “You may have made peace with
this, Henry, but I haven’t.”

532

“This won’t work,” he warns. “You can’t reason with him.”
Addie tugs free of his grip. “I’m willing to try,” she says,
slipping the ring over her ﬁnger.
There is no ﬂood of darkness.
Only a stillness, a vacant quiet, and then—
A knock.
And she is grateful that at least he didn’t invite himself in.
But Henry stands between her and the door, his hands
braced across the narrow hall. He doesn’t move, his eyes
pleading. Addie reaches up and cups his face.
“I need you to trust me,” she says.
Something cracks in him. One hand drops from the frame.
She kisses him, and then she slides by, and opens the
door for the dark.
“Adeline.”
Luc should look out of place in the building’s hall, but he
never does.
The lights on the walls have dimmed a little, softened to a
yellow haze that haloes the black curls around his face, and
catches slivers of gold in his green eyes.
He is dressed in all black, tailored slacks and a buttondown shirt, the sleeves rolled to the elbows, an emerald pin
driven through the silk tie at his throat.
It is far too hot for such an outﬁt, but Luc doesn’t seem to
mind. The heat, like the rain, like the world itself, seems to
have no hold on him.
He does not tell her she looks beautiful.
He does not tell her anything.
He simply turns, expecting her to follow.
And as she steps into the hall, he looks to Henry. And
winks.
Addie should have stopped right there.
She should have turned around, let Henry pull her back
inside. They should have shut the door, and bolted it against

533

the dark.
But they didn’t.
They don’t.
Addie glances back over her shoulder at Henry, who
lingers in the doorway, a cloud shadowing his face. She wills
him to close the door, but he doesn’t, and she has no choice
but to step away, and follow Luc as Henry watches.
Downstairs, he holds open the building’s door, but Addie
stops. Looks down at the threshold. Darkness coils in the
frame, shimmers between them and the steps down to the
street.
She doesn’t trust the shadows, she can’t see where they
lead, and the last thing she needs is for Luc to strand her in
some far-oﬀ land if and when the night goes bad.
“There are rules tonight,” she says.
“Oh?”
“I won’t leave the city,” she says, nodding at the door.
“And I won’t go that way.”
“Through a door?”
“Through the dark.”
Luc’s brows draw up. “Don’t you trust me?”
“I never have,” she says. “There’s no use starting now.”
Luc laughs, soft and soundless, and steps outside to hail a
car. Seconds later, a sleek black sedan pulls up to the curb.
He holds out his hand to help her in. She doesn’t take it.
He does not give the driver an address.
The driver does not ask for one.
And when Addie asks where they are going, Luc does not
answer.
Soon they are on the Manhattan Bridge.
The silence between them should be awkward. The
halting conversation of exes too long apart, and still not
long enough to have forgiven anything.
What is forty years against three hundred?

534

But this is a silence born of strategy.
This is the silence of a chess game being played.
And this time, Addie has to win.

535

Los Angeles, California
April 7, 1952

IX
“God, you’re beautiful,” says Max, lifting his glass.
Addie blushes, eyes dropping to her martini.
They met on the street outside the Wilshire that morning,
the creases from his bedsheets still pressed into her skin.
She was lingering on the curb in his favorite wine-colored
dress, and when he came out for his morning stroll, he
stopped and asked if he could be so bold as to walk with
her, wherever she was going, and when they got there, to a
pretty building picked at random, he kissed her hand, and
said good-bye, but he didn’t leave, and neither did she.
They spent the whole day together, strolling from a tea shop
to a park to the art museum, ﬁnding excuses to continue in
each other’s company.
And when she told him that it was the best birthday she’d
had in years, he blinked at her in horror, shocked at the idea
a girl like her would ﬁnd herself alone, and here they are,
drinking martinis at the Roosevelt.
(It is not her birthday, of course, and she’s not sure why
she told him it was. Perhaps to see what he would do.
Perhaps because even she is getting bored of living the
same night over again.)
“Have you ever met someone,” he says, “and felt like
you’ve known them for ages?”
Addie smiles.

536

He always says the same things, but he means them
every time. She toys with the silver thread at her throat, the
wooden ring tucked into the neckline of her dress. A habit
she cannot seem to break.
A server appears at her elbow with a bottle of
Champagne.
“What’s this?” she asks.
“For the birthday girl on this special evening,” says Max
brightly. “And the lucky gentleman who gets to spend it with
her.”
She admires the tiny bubbles rising through the ﬂute,
knows even before she takes a sip that it’s the real thing;
old, expensive. Knows, too, that Max can easily aﬀord the
luxury.
He is a sculptor—Addie has always had a weakness for
the ﬁne arts—and talented, yes, but far from starving.
Unlike so many of the artists Addie has been with, he comes
from money, the family funds sturdy enough to weather the
wars, and the lean years between them.
He raises his glass, just as a shadow falls across the table.
She assumes it’s their server, but then Max looks up, and
frowns a little. “Can I help you?”
And Addie hears a voice like silk and smoke. “I do believe
you can.”
There is Luc, dressed in an elegant black suit. He is
beautiful. He is always beautiful. “Hello, my dear.”
Max’s frown deepens. “Do you two know each other?”
“No,” she says at the same time Luc says, “Yes,” and it’s
not fair, the way his voice carries and hers does not.
“He’s an old friend,” she says, a biting edge in her tone.
“But—”
Again, he cuts her oﬀ. “But we haven’t seen each other in
a while, so if you’d be so kind…”
Max bristles. “That’s quite impertinent—”

537

“Go.”
It is just one word, but the air ripples with the force of it,
the syllable wrapping like gauze around her date. The ﬁght
drops out of Max’s face. The annoyance smooths, and his
eyes go glassy as he rises from the table, and walks away.
He never even looks back.
“Dammit,” she swears, sinking in her seat. “Why must
you be such an ass?”
Luc lowers himself into the vacant chair, and lifts the
bottle of Champagne, reﬁlling their glasses. “Your birthday is
in March.”
“When you get to be my age,” she says, “you celebrate
as often as you like.”
“How long have you been with him?”
“Two months. It’s not so bad,” she says, sipping her drink.
“He falls for me every day.”
“And forgets you every night.”
The words bite, but not as deeply as they used to.
“At least he keeps me company.”
Those emerald eyes trail over her skin. “So would I,” he
says, “if you wanted it.”
A ﬂush of warmth sweeps across her cheeks.
He cannot know that she has missed him. Thought of him,
the way she used to think of her stranger, alone in bed at
night. Thought of him every time she toyed with the ring at
her throat, and every time she didn’t.
“Well,” she says, ﬁnishing her drink. “You’ve stripped me
of my date. The least you can do is try and ﬁll the space.”
And just like that, the green in Luc’s eyes is back,
brighter.
“Come,” he says, drawing her up from her chair. “The
night is young, and we can do far better.”

538

The Cicada Club buzzes with life.
Art deco chandeliers hang low, shining up against a
burnished ceiling. It is crushed red carpet and stairs
sweeping up to balcony seats. It is linen-covered tables and
a polished dance ﬂoor set before a low stage.
They arrive as a brass band ﬁnishes its set, trumpets and
sax spilling through the club. The place is packed, and yet,
when Luc draws her through the crowd, there is a table
sitting empty at the front. The best in the house.
They take their seats, and moments later a waiter
appears, two martinis balanced on his tray. She thinks of
that ﬁrst dinner they shared in the marquis’s house,
centuries ago, the meal ready before she even agreed to
have it, and wonders if Luc planned this in advance, or if the
world simply bends to meet his wish.
The crowd erupts in cheers as a new performer takes the
stage.
A narrow man with a wan face, narrow brows arching
beneath a gray fedora.
Luc stares at him with the sharp pride of something
owned.
“What’s his name?” she asks.
“Sinatra,” he answers as the band lifts, and the man
begins to sing. A crooner’s melody, smooth and sweet, spills
into the room. Addie listens, mesmerized, and then men and
women begin to rise from their chairs and step out onto the
dance ﬂoor.
Addie stands, holding out her hand. “Dance with me,” she
says.
Luc looks up at her, but doesn’t rise.
“Max would have danced with me,” she says.
She expects him to refuse her, but Luc rises to his feet,
and takes her hand, leading her onto the ﬂoor.

539

She expects him to be stiﬀ, unyielding, but Luc moves
with the ﬂuid grace of wind rushing through ﬁelds of wheat,
of storms rolling through the summer skies.
She tries to remember a time they were this close, and
can’t.
They have always kept their distance.
Now, the space collapses.
His body wraps around hers like a blanket, like a breeze,
like the night itself. But tonight, he does not feel like a thing
of shadow and smoke. Tonight, his arms are solid against
her skin. His voice slides through her hair.
“Even if everyone you met remembered,” Luc says, “I
would still know you best.”
She searches his face. “Do I know you?”
He bows his head over hers. “You are the only one who
does.”
Their bodies press together, one shaped to ﬁt the other
perfectly.
His shoulder, molded to her cheek.
His hands, molded to her waist.
His voice, molded to the hollow places in her as he says,
“I want you.” And then, again, “I have always wanted you.”
Luc looks down at her, those green eyes dark with
pleasure, and Addie ﬁghts to hold her ground.
“You want me as a prize,” she says. “You want me as a
meal, or a glass of wine. Just another thing to be
consumed.”
He dips his head, presses his lips to her collarbone. “Is
that so wrong?”
She ﬁghts back a shiver as he kisses her throat. “Is it such
a bad thing…” His mouth trails along her jaw. “… to be
savored?” His breath brushes her ear. “To be relished?”
His mouth hovers over hers, and his lips, too, are molded
to her own.

540

She will never be quite sure which happened ﬁrst—if she
kissed him, or he kissed her, who began the gesture, and
who rose to meet it. She will only know that there was space
between them, and it has vanished. She has thought of
kissing Luc before, of course, when he was just a ﬁgment of
her mind, and then, when he was more. But in all her
conjurings, he’d taken her mouth as if it is a prize. After all,
that is how he kissed her the night they met, when he
sealed the deal with the blood on her lips. That is how she
assumed he would always kiss.
But now, he kisses her like someone tasting poison.
Cautious, questing, almost afraid.
And only when she answers, returns the kiss in kind, does
he deepen his advance, his teeth skating along her bottom
lip, the weight and heat of his body pressing against hers.
He tastes like the air at night, heady with the weight of
summer storms. He tastes like the faint traces of far-oﬀ
woodsmoke, a ﬁre dying in the dark. He tastes like the
forest, and somehow, impossibly, like home.
And then darkness reaches up around her, around them,
and the Cicada Club vanishes; the low music and the
crooner’s melody swallowed up by the pressing void, by
rushing wind, and racing hearts, and Addie is falling, forever
and a single backward step—and then her feet ﬁnd the
smooth marble ﬂoor of a hotel room, and Luc is there,
pressing her forward, and she is there, drawing him back
against the nearest wall.
His arms lift around her, forming a loose and open cage.
She could break it, if she tried.
She doesn’t try.
He kisses her again, and this time, he is not tasting
poison. This time, there is no caution, no pulling back; the
kiss is sudden, sharp, and deep, stealing air and thought
and leaving only hunger, and for a moment, Addie can feel

541

the yawning dark, feel it opening around her, even though
the ground is still there.
She has kissed a lot of people. But none of them will ever
kiss like him. The diﬀerence doesn’t lie in the technicalities.
His mouth is no better shaped to the task. It is just in the
way he uses it.
It is the diﬀerence between tasting a peach out of season,
and that ﬁrst bite into sun-ripened fruit.
The diﬀerence between seeing only in black-and-white,
and a life in full-color ﬁlm.
That ﬁrst time, it is a kind of ﬁght, neither letting down
their guard, each watching for the telltale glint of some
hidden blade seeking ﬂesh.
When they ﬁnally collide, it is with all the force of bodies
kept too long apart.
It is a battle waged on bedsheets.
And in the morning, the whole room shows the signs of
their war.
“It’s been so long,” he says, “since I haven’t wanted to
leave.”
She looks at the window, the ﬁrst thin edge of light. “Then
don’t.”
“I must,” he says. “I am a thing of darkness.”
She props her head up on one hand. “Will you vanish with
the sun?”
“I will simply go where it is dark again.”
Addie rises, goes to the window, and draws the curtains
closed, plunging the room back into lightless black.
“There,” she says, feeling her way back to him. “Now it is
dark again.”
Luc laughs, a soft, beautiful sound, and pulls her down
into the bed.

542

Everywhere, Nowhere
1952–1968

X
It is only sex.
At least, it starts that way.
He is a thing to be gotten out of her system.
She is a novelty to be enjoyed.
Addie half expects them to burn out in a single night, to
waste whatever energy they’ve gathered in their years of
spinning.
But two months later, he comes to ﬁnd her again, steps
out of nothing and back into her life, and she thinks about
how strange it is, to see him against the reds and golds of
autumn, the changing leaves, a charcoal scarf looped loose
around his throat.
It is weeks until his next visit.
And then, only days.
So many years of solitary nights, hours of waiting, and
hating, and hoping. Now he is there.
Still, Addie makes herself small promises in the space
between his visits.
She will not linger in his arms.
She will not fall asleep beside him.
She will not feel anything but his lips on her skin, his
hands tangled in hers, the weight of him against her.
Small promises, but ones she does not keep.
It is only sex.

543

And then it is not.
“Dine with me,” Luc says as winter gives way to spring.
“Dance with me,” he says as a new year begins.
“Be with me,” he says, at last, as one decade slips into
the next.
And one night Addie wakes in the dark to the soft
pressure of his ﬁngertips drawing patterns on her skin, and
she is struck by the look in his eyes. No, not the look. The
knowing.
It is the ﬁrst time that she has woken up in bed with
someone who hasn’t already forgotten her. The ﬁrst time
she’s heard her name again after the pause of sleep. The
ﬁrst time she hasn’t felt alone.
And something in her splinters.
Addie does not hate him anymore. Has not for a long
time.
She does not know when the shift started, if it was a
speciﬁc point in time, or, as Luc once warned her, the slow
erosion of a coast.
All she knows is that she is tired, and he is the place she
wants to rest.
And that, somehow, she is happy.
But it is not love.
Whenever Addie feels herself forgetting, she presses her
ear to his bare chest and listens for the drum of life, the
drawing of breath, and hears only the woods at night, the
quiet hush of summer. A reminder that he is a lie, that his
face and his ﬂesh are simply a disguise.
That he is not human, and this is not love.

544

New York City
July 30, 2014

XI
The city slides past beyond the window, but Addie doesn’t
turn her head, doesn’t admire the skyline of Manhattan, the
buildings soaring to every side. Instead, she studies Luc,
reﬂected in the darkened glass, the line of his jaw, the arc of
his brow, angles drawn by her hand so many, many years
ago. She is watching him, the way one watches a wolf at the
edge of the woods, waiting to see what it will do.
He is the ﬁrst to break the silence.
The ﬁrst to move a piece.
“Do you remember the opera in Munich?”
“I remember everything, Luc.”
“The way you looked at the players on that stage, as if
you’d never seen theater before.”
“I’d never seen theater like that.”
“The wonder in your eyes, at the sight of something new.
I knew then I’d never win.”
She wants to savor the words like a sip of good wine, but
the grapes turn sour in her mouth. She does not trust them.
The car pulls to a stop outside Le Coucou, a beautiful
French restaurant on the lower side of SoHo, ivy climbing
the outer walls. She has been there before, two of the best
meals she’s had in New York, and she wonders if Luc knows
how much she likes it, or if he simply shares her taste.
Again, he oﬀers his hand.

545

Again, she does not take it.
Addie watches a couple as they approach the doors of the
restaurant, only to ﬁnd them locked, watches them walk
away, murmuring something about reservations. But when
Luc takes the handle, the door swings open easily.
Inside, massive chandeliers hang from the high ceilings,
and the large glass windows shine black. The place feels
cavernous, large enough to seat a hundred, but tonight it is
empty, save for two chefs visible in the open kitchen, a pair
of servers, and the maître d’, who drops into a low bow as
Luc approaches.
“Monsieur Dubois,” he says in a dreamy voice.
“Mademoiselle.”
He leads them to their table, a red rose set before each
place. The maître d’ pulls back her chair, and Luc waits for
her to take her seat before taking his own. The man opens a
bottle of merlot, and pours, and Luc lifts his glass to her and
says, “To you, Adeline.”
There is no menu. No order to be taken. The plates simply
arrive.
Foie gras with cherries, and rabbit terrine. Halibut in
beurre blanc, and fresh-baked bread, and half a dozen kinds
of cheese.
The food is, of course, exquisite.
But as they eat, the host and servers stand against the
walls, eyes open, empty, a bland expression on their faces.
She has always hated this aspect of his power, and the
careless way he wields it.
She tips her glass in the direction of the puppets.
“Send them away,” she says, and he does. A silent
gesture, and the servers disappear, and they are alone in
the empty restaurant.
“Would you do that to me?” she asks when they are gone.

546

Luc shakes his head. “I could not,” he says, and she
thinks he means because he cared for her too much, but
then he says, “I have no power over promised souls. Their
will is their own.”
It is cold comfort, she thinks, but it is something.
Luc looks down into his wine. He turns the stem between
his ﬁngers, and there in the darkened glass, she sees the
two of them, tangled in silk sheets, sees her ﬁngers in his
hair, his hands playing songs against her skin.
“Tell me, Adeline,” he says. “Have you missed me?”
Of course she has missed him.
She can tell herself, as she has told him, that she only
missed being seen, or missed the force of his attention, the
intoxication of his presence—but it is more than that. She
missed him the way someone might miss the sun in winter,
though they still dread its heat. She missed the sound of his
voice, the knowing in his touch, the ﬂint-on-stone friction of
their conversations, the way they ﬁt together.
He is gravity.
He is three hundred years of history.
He is the only constant in her life, the only one who will
always, always remember.
Luc is the man she dreamed of when she was young, and
then the one she hated most, and the one she loved, and
Addie missed him every night that he was gone from her,
and he deserved none of her pain because it was his fault, it
was his fault no one else remembered, it was his fault that
she lost and lost and lost, and she does not say any of that
because it will change nothing, and because there is still
one thing she hasn’t lost. One piece of her story that she
can save.
Henry.
So Addie makes her gambit.

547

She reaches across the table and takes Luc’s hand, tells
him the truth.
“I missed you.”
His green eyes shimmer and shift at the words. He
brushes the ring on her ﬁnger, traces the whorls in the
wood.
“How many times did you almost put it on?” he asks.
“How often did you think of me?” And she assumes he is
baiting her—until his voice softens to a whisper, the faintest
roll of thunder in the air between them. “Because I thought
of you. Always.”
“You didn’t come.”
“You didn’t call.”
She looks down at their tangled hands. “Tell me, Luc,” she
says. “Was any of it real?”
“What is real to you, Adeline? Since my love counts for
nothing?”
“You are not capable of love.”
He scowls, his eyes ﬂashing emerald. “Because I am not
human? Because I do not wither and die?”
“No,” she says, drawing back her hand. “You are not
capable of love because you cannot understand what it is to
care for someone else more than yourself. If you loved me,
you would have let me go by now.”
Luc ﬂicks his ﬁngers. “What nonsense,” he says. “It is
because I love you that I won’t. Love is hungry. Love is
selﬁsh.”
“You are thinking of possession.”
He shrugs. “Are they so diﬀerent? I have seen what
humans do to things they love.”
“People are not things,” she says. “And you will never
understand them.”
“I understand you, Adeline. I know you, better than
anyone in this world.”

548

“Because you let me have no one else.” She takes a
steadying breath. “I know you won’t spare me, Luc, and
perhaps you are right, we do belong together. So if you love
me, spare Henry Strauss. If you love me, let him go.”
His temper ﬂashes through his face. “This is our night,
Adeline. Do not ruin it with talk of someone else.”
“But you said—”
“Come,” he says, pushing back from the table. “This place
no longer suits my taste.”
The server has just set a pear tart on the table, but it
turns to ash as Luc speaks, and Addie marvels, the way she
always has, at the moodiness of gods.
“Luc,” she starts, but he is already on his feet, casting the
napkin oﬀ onto the ruined food.

549

New Orleans, Louisiana
July 29, 1970

XII
“I love you.”
They are in New Orleans when he says it, dining in a
hidden bar in the French Quarter, one of his many
installations.
Addie shakes her head, amazed the words do not turn to
ash in his mouth. “Do not pretend that this is love.”
Annoyance ﬂashes across Luc’s face. “What is love, then?
Tell me. Tell me your heart doesn’t ﬂutter when you hear my
voice. That it doesn’t ache when you hear your name on my
lips.”
“It’s my own name I ache for, not your lips.”
The edge of his mouth curls up, his eyes now emerald. A
brightness born of pleasure. “Once, perhaps,” he says. “But
now it’s more.”
She is afraid that he is right.
And then, he sets a box before her.
It is simple, and black, and if Addie were to reach for it, it
would be small enough to ﬁt within her palm.
But she doesn’t, not at ﬁrst.
“What is it?” she asks.
“A gift.”
Still she does not take it.
“Honestly, Adeline,” he says, sweeping the box from the
table. “It will not bite.”

550

He opens it, and sets it back before her.
Inside, there is a simple brass key, and when she asks
him where it leads, he says, “Home.”
Addie stiﬀens.
She has not had a home, not since Villon. Has never, in
fact, had a place of her own, and she is almost grateful,
before she remembers, of course, that he is the reason why.
“Do not mock me, Luc.”
“I am not mocking you,” he says.
He takes her hand and leads her through the Quarter, to a
place at the end of Bourbon Street, a yellow house with a
balcony, and windows as tall as doors. She slides the key
into the lock, and listens to the heavy sound of the turn, and
realizes, if it belonged to Luc instead of her, the door would
simply open. And suddenly, the brass key feels real and
solid in her hand, a treasured thing.
The door swings open onto a house with high ceilings,
and wooden ﬂoors, with furniture, and closets, and spaces
to be ﬁlled. She steps out onto the balcony, the layered
sounds of the Quarter rising to meet her on the humid air.
Jazz spills through the streets, crashing, overlapping, a
chaotic melody, changing and alive.
“It is yours,” says Luc, “a home,” and the old warning
sounds, deep in the marrow of her bones.
But these days, it is a shrinking beacon, a lighthouse
viewed too far from port.
He pulls her back against him, and Addie notices again
the perfect way they ﬁt together.
As if he was made for her.
Which, of course, he was. This body, this face, these
features, made to make her feel at ease.
“Let’s go out,” he says.
Addie wants to stay in, to christen the house, but he says
there will be time, there will always be time. And for once,

551

she doesn’t dread the idea of forever. For once, the days
and nights don’t drag, but race ahead.
She knows that, whatever this is, it will not last.
It cannot last.
Nothing ever does.
But in the moment, she is happy.
They make their way through the Quarter, arm in arm,
and Luc lights a cigarette, and when she tells him it’s bad
for his health, he lets out a breathy, noiseless laugh, smoke
pouring between his lips.
Her steps slow before a shop window.
The store is closed, of course, but even through the
darkened glass, she can see the leather jacket, black with
silver buckles, draped over a mannequin.
Luc’s reﬂection shimmers behind her as he follows her
gaze.
“It is summer,” he says.
“It won’t always be.”
Luc smooths his hands over her shoulders and she feels
the soft leather settling against her skin, the mannequin in
the window now bare, and tries not to think of all the years
she went without, forced to suﬀer through the cold, of all
the times she had to hide, and ﬁght, and steal. She tries not
to think of them, but she does.
They are halfway back to the yellow house when Luc
peels away.
“I have work to do,” he says. “Go on home.”
Home—the word rattles through her chest as he walks
away.
But she does not go.
She watches Luc round the corner, and cross the street,
and then she lingers in the shadow as he approaches a shop
with a luminescent palm painted on the door.

552

An older woman stands on the sidewalk, closing up, her
frame bent over a ring of keys, a large bag drooping from
one elbow.
She must hear him coming, because she murmurs
something to the dark, something about closing, something
about another day. And then she turns, and sees him.
In the glass of the shop window, Addie sees Luc, too, not
as he is to her, but as he must appear to the woman in the
doorway. He has kept those dark curls, but his face is leaner,
sharper in a wolﬁsh way, his eyes deep-set, his limbs too
thin to be human.
“A deal is a deal,” he says, the words bending on the air.
“And it is done.”
Addie watches, expecting the woman to beg, to run.
But she sets her bag down on the ground, and lifts her
chin.
“A deal is a deal,” she says. “And I am tired.”
And somehow, this is worse.
Because Addie understands.
Because she is tired, too.
And as she watches, the darkness comes undone again.
It has been more than a hundred years since Addie last
saw the truth of him, the roiling night, with all its teeth. Only
this time, there is no rending, no tearing, no horror.
The darkness simply folds around the old woman like a
storm, blotting out the light.
Addie turns away.
She goes back to the yellow house on Bourbon Street,
and pours herself a glass of wine, crisp and cold and white.
It is blisteringly hot; the balcony doors are ﬂung open to
ease the summer night. She is leaning on the iron rail when
she hears him arrive, not on the street below, as a courting
lover might, but in the room behind her.

553

And when his arms drift around her shoulders, Addie
remembers the way he held the woman in the doorway, the
way he folded around her, swallowing her whole.

554

New York City
July 30, 2014

XIII
Luc’s mood lifts a little as they walk.
The night is warm, the moon barely a crescent overhead.
His head falls back, and he inhales, breathing in the air as if
it were not ripe with summer heat, too many people in too
little space.
“How long have you been here?” she asks.
“I come and go,” he says, but she has learned to read the
space between his words, and guesses he has been in New
York almost as long as she has, lurking like a shadow at her
back.
She doesn’t know where they are going, and for the ﬁrst
time, she wonders if Luc does either, or if he is simply
walking, trying to put space between them and the end of
their meal.
But as they make their way uptown, she feels time folding
around them, and she does not know if it’s his magic or her
memory, but with each passing block, she is storming from
him down the Seine. He is leading her away from the sea.
She is following him in Florence. They are side by side in
Boston, and arm in arm on Bourbon Street.
They are here, together, in New York. And she wonders
what would have happened if he hadn’t said the word. If he
hadn’t tipped his hand. If he hadn’t ruined everything.

555

“The night is ours,” he says, turning toward her, and his
eyes are bright again. “Where shall we go?”
Home, she thinks, though she cannot say it.
She looks up at the skyscrapers, surging to either side.
“Which one,” she wonders, “has the best view?”
After a moment, Luc smiles, ﬂashing teeth, and says,
“Follow me.”

Over the years, Addie has learned many of the city’s
secrets.
But here is one she did not know.
It resides not underground, but on a roof.
Eighty-four stories up, reached by a pair of elevators, the
ﬁrst one nondescript and rising only to the eighty-ﬁrst ﬂoor.
The second, a direct replica of Rodin’s Gates of Hell, with its
writhing bodies, clawing to escape, takes you the rest of the
way.
If you have a key.
Luc draws the black card from his shirt pocket and slides
it into a yawning mouth along the elevator’s frame.
“Is this one of yours?” she asks as the doors slide open.
“Nothing is really mine,” he says by way of answer as
they step inside.
It is a short ascent, three brief ﬂoors, and when it stops,
the doors open onto an uninterrupted view of the city.
The bar’s name winds in black letters at her feet.
THE LOW ROAD.

Addie rolls her eyes. “Was Perdition taken?”
“Perdition,” he says, eyes sparkling with mischief, “is a
diﬀerent kind of club.”
The ﬂoors are bronze, the railings glass, and the ceiling
open to the sky, and people mill on velvet sofas and dip

556

their feet in shallow pools, and linger along the balconies
that ring the roof, admiring the city.
“Mr. Green,” says the hostess. “Welcome back.”
“Thank you, Renee,” he says smoothly. “This is Adeline.
Give her anything she wants.”
The hostess looks to her, but there is no compulsion in
her eyes, no sense that she has been enchanted, only the
cooperation of an employee, one very good at her job. Addie
asks for the most expensive drink, and Renee grins at Luc.
“You’ve found yourself a match.”
“I have,” he says, resting his hand on the small of Addie’s
back as he guides her forward. She quickens her step until it
falls away, and weaves through the milling crowd to the
glass rail, looking out over Manhattan. There are no stars
visible, of course, but New York rolls away to every side, its
own galaxy of light.
Up here, at least, she can breathe.
It is the easy laughter of the crowd. The ambient noise of
people enjoying themselves, so much nicer than the stiﬂed
quiet of the empty restaurant, the cloistered silence of the
car. It is the sky opening above her. The beauty of the city to
every side, and the fact they are not alone.
Renee returns with a bottle of Champagne, a visible ﬁlm
of dust coating the glass.
“Dom Perignon, 1959,” she explains, holding the bottle
out for inspection. “From your private case, Mr. Green.”
Luc waves his hand, and she opens the bottle, pouring
two ﬂutes, the bubbles so small they look like ﬂecks of
diamond in the glass.
Addie sips, savors the way it sparkles on her tongue.
She scans the crowd, ﬁlled with the kinds of faces you
would recognize, even though you’re not sure where you’ve
seen them. Luc points them out to her, those senators, and

557

actors, authors and critics, and she wonders if any of them
have sold their soul. If any of them are about to.
Addie looks down into her glass, the bubbles still rising
smoothly to the surface, and when she speaks, the words
are barely more than a whisper, the sound stolen by the
chattering crowd. But she knows he is listening, knows he
can hear her.
“Let him go, Luc.”
His mouth tightens a fraction. “Adeline,” he warns.
“You told me you would listen.”
“Fine.” He leans back against the rail and spreads his
arms. “Tell me. What do you see in him, this latest human
lover?”
Henry Strauss is thoughtful, and kind, she wants to say.
He is clever, and bright, gentle, and warm.
He is everything you’re not,
But Addie knows she must tread lightly.
“What do I see in him?” she says. “I see myself. Not who I
am now, perhaps, but who I was, the night you came to
rescue me.”
Luc scowls. “Henry Strauss wanted to die. You wanted to
live. You are nothing alike.”
“It’s not that simple.”
“Isn’t it?”
Addie shakes her head. “You see only ﬂaws and faults,
weaknesses to be exploited. But humans are messy, Luc.
That is the wonder of them. They live and love and make
mistakes, and they feel so much. And maybe—maybe I am
no longer one of them.”
The words tear through her as she says them, because
she knows this much is true. For better or worse.
“But I remember,” she presses on. “I remember what it’s
like, and Henry is—”
“Lost.”

558

“He is searching,” she counters. “And he will ﬁnd his way,
if you let him.”
“If I let him,” says Luc, “he would have leapt oﬀ a roof.”
“You don’t know that,” she says. “You never will, because
you intervened.”
“I am in the business of souls, Adeline, not second
chances.”
“And I am begging you to let him go. You will not give me
mine, so give me his, instead.”
Luc exhales, and sweeps his hand across the roof.
“Choose someone,” he says.
“What?”
He turns her to face the crowd. “Choose a soul to take his
place. Pick a stranger. Damn one of them instead.” His voice
is low and smooth and certain. “There is always a cost,” he
says gently. “A price must be paid. Henry Strauss bartered
his own soul. Would you sell someone else’s to have it
back?”
Addie stares out at the crowded roof, the faces she
recognizes and the ones she doesn’t. Young and old,
together and alone.
Are any innocent?
Are any cruel?
Addie does not know if she can do it—until her hand drifts
up. Until she points to a man in the crowd, heart plunging
through her stomach as she waits for Luc to let go of her, to
step forward, and claim his price.
But Luc doesn’t move.
He only laughs.
“My Adeline,” he says, kissing her hair. “You have
changed more than you think.”
She feels dizzy and ill as she twists to face him.
“No more games,” she says.
“All right,” he says, just before he pulls her into the dark.

559

The roof drops away, and the void surges up around her,
swallowing everything but a starless sky, an inﬁnite, violent
black. And when it withdraws again an instant later, the
world is silent, and the city is gone, and she is alone in the
woods.

560

New Orleans, Louisiana
May 1, 1984

XIV
This is how it ends.
With candles burning on the sill, unsteady light casting
long shadows across the bed. With the blackest part of night
stretching beyond the open window, and the ﬁrst blush of
summer on the air, and Addie in Luc’s arms, the darkness
draped around her like a sheet.
And this, she thinks, is home.
This, perhaps, is love.
And that is the worst part. She has ﬁnally forgotten
something. Only it is the wrong thing. It is the one thing she
was supposed to remember. That the man in the bed is not
a man. That the life is not a life. That there are games, and
battles, but in the end, it is all a kind of war.
A touch like teeth along her jaw.
The darkness whispering against her skin. “My Adeline.”
“I am not yours,” she says, but his mouth only smiles
against her throat.
“And yet,” he says, “we are together. We belong
together.”
You belong to me.
“Do you love me?” she asks.
His ﬁngers trail along her hips. “You know I do.”
“Then let me go.”
“I am not holding you here.”

561

“That isn’t what I mean,” she says, rising on one arm.
“Set me free.”
He draws back, just enough to meet her gaze. “I cannot
break the deal.” His head falls, black curls brushing her
cheek. “But perhaps,” he whispers against her collar, “I
could bend it.”
Addie’s heart thuds inside her chest.
“Perhaps I could change the terms.”
She holds her breath as Luc’s words play along her skin.
“I can make it better,” he murmurs. “All you have to do is
surrender.”
The word is a cold shock.
A curtain falling on a play: the lovely sets, the stagings,
the trained actors all vanish behind the darkened cloth.
Surrender.
An order whispered in the dark.
A warning given to a broken man.
A demand made over and over and over for years—until it
stopped. How long ago did he stop asking? But of course,
she knows—it was when his method changed, when his
temper toward her softened.
And she is a fool. She is a fool for thinking it meant peace
instead of war.
Surrender.
“What is it?” he asks, feigning confusion, until she throws
the word back in his face.
“Surrender?” she snarls.
“It is just a word,” he says. But he taught her the power of
a word. A word is everything, and his word is a serpent, a
coiled trick, a curse.
“It is the nature of things,” he says.
“In order to change the deal,” he says.
But Addie pulls back, pulls away, pulls free. “And I am
meant to trust you? To give in, and believe that you will give

562

me back?”
So many years, so many diﬀerent ways of asking the
same thing.
Do you yield?
“You must think me an idiot, Luc.” Her face burns with
anger. “I’m amazed you had the patience. But then, you’ve
always been fond of the chase.”
His green eyes narrow in the dark. “Adeline.”
“Don’t you dare say my name.” She is on her feet now,
singing with rage. “I knew you were a monster, Luc. I saw it
often enough. And yet, I still thought—somehow I thought—
after all this time—but of course, it wasn’t love, was it? It
wasn’t even kindness. It was just another game.”
There is an instant when she thinks she might be wrong.
A fraction of a moment when Luc looks wounded and
confused, and she wonders if he meant only what he said, if,
if—
But then, it is over.
The hurt falls from his face and it passes into shadow, the
eﬀect as smooth as a cloud across the sun. A grim smile
plays across his lips.
“And what a tiresome game it’s been.”
She knows she drew it out, but the truth still crashes
through her.
If she was cracked before, now she is breaking.
“You cannot fault me for trying a diﬀerent hand.”
“I fault you for everything.”
Luc rises, the darkness drawing into silk around him. “I
have given you everything.”
“None of it was real!”
She will not cry.
She will not give him the satisfaction of seeing her suﬀer.
She will not give him anything, ever again.
This is how the ﬁght begins.

563

Or rather, this is how it ends.
Most ﬁghts, after all, are not the work of an instant. They
build over days, or weeks, each side gathering their
kindling, stoking their ﬂames.
But this is a ﬁght forged over centuries.
As old and inevitable as the turning of the world, the
passing of an era, the collision of a girl and the dark.
She should have known it would happen.
Perhaps she did.
But to this day, Addie doesn’t know how the ﬁre started. If
it was the candles she swept from the table, or the lamp she
tore from the wall, if it was the lights Luc shattered, or if it
was simply a last act of spite.
She knows she doesn’t have the strength to ruin
anything, and yet she did. They did. Perhaps he let her start
the ﬁre. Perhaps he simply let it burn.
It does not matter, in the end.
Addie stands on Bourbon Street and watches the house
go up in ﬂames, and by the time the ﬁreﬁghters come, there
is nothing left to save. It is only ashes.
Another life gone up in smoke.
Addie has nothing, not even the key in her pocket. It was
there, but when she reaches for it, it is gone. Her hand goes
to the wooden ring still at her throat.
She tears it free, hurls the band into the smoking ruins of
her home, and walks away.

564

New York City
July 30, 2014

XV
Addie is surrounded by trees.
The mossy scent of summer in the woods.
Fear winds through her, the sudden, horrible certainty
that Luc has broken both rules instead of one, that he has
dragged her through the dark, stolen her away from New
York, abandoned her somewhere far, far from home.
But then her eyes adjust, and she turns, and sees the
skyline rising above the trees, and realizes she must be in
Central Park.
Relief sweeps through her.
And then Luc’s voice drifts through the dark.
“Adeline, Adeline…” he says, and she cannot tell what is
an echo, and what is simply him, unbound by ﬂesh and bone
and mortal shapes.
“You promised,” she calls.
“Did I?”
Luc steps out of the dark, the way he did that night,
drawing together from smoke and shadow. A storm, bottled
into skin.
Am I the devil or the darkness? he asked her once. Am I a
monster or a god?
He is no longer dressed in the sleek black suit, but as he
was when she ﬁrst summoned him, a stranger in trousers, a

565

pale tunic open at his throat, his black hair curling against
his temples.
The dream conjured so many years ago.
But one thing has changed. There is no triumph in his
eyes. The color has gone out of them, so pale they’re almost
gray. And though she’s never seen the shade before, she
guesses it is sadness.
“I will give you what you want,” he says. “If you will do
one thing.”
“What?” she asks.
Luc holds out his hand.
“Dance with me,” he says.
There is longing in his voice, and loss, and she thinks,
perhaps, it is the end, of this, of them. A game ﬁnally played
out. A war with no winners.
And so she agrees to dance.
There is no music, but it does not matter.
When she takes his hand, she hears the melody, soft and
soothing in her head. Not a song, exactly, but the sound of
the woods in summer, the steady hush of the wind through
the ﬁelds. And as he pulls her close, she hears a violin, low
and mournful, along the Seine. His hand slides through hers,
and there is the steady murmur of the seaside. The
symphony soaring through Munich. Addie leans her head
against his shoulder, and hears the rain falling in Villon, the
brass band ringing in an L.A. lounge, and the ripple of a
saxophone through the open windows on Bourbon.
The dancing stops.
The music fades.
A tear slides down her cheek. “All you had to do was set
me free.”
Luc sighs, and lifts her chin. “I could not.”
“Because of the deal.”
“Because you are mine.”

566

Addie twists free. “I was never yours, Luc,” she says,
turning away. “Not in the woods that night. And not when
you took me to bed. You were the one who said it was just a
game.”
“I lied.” The words, a knife. “You loved me,” he says. “And
I loved you.”
“And yet,” she says, “you didn’t come to ﬁnd me until I’d
found someone else.”
She turns back toward him, expecting to see those eyes
yellowing with envy. But instead, they have gone a weedy,
arrogant green, mirrored by the expression on his face, the
faint lift of a single brow, the corner of his mouth.
“Oh, Adeline,” he says. “You think you found each other?”
The words are a missed step.
A sudden drop.
“Do you truly think that I would let that happen?”
The ground tilts beneath her feet.
“That for all the deals I do, such a thing would ever pass
beneath my notice?”
Addie squeezes her eyes shut, and she is lying beside
Henry, their ﬁngers laced together in the grass. She is
looking up at the night sky. She is laughing at the idea that
Luc ﬁnally made a mistake.
“You must have thought yourselves so clever,” he is
saying now. “Star-crossed lovers, brought together by
chance. What are the odds that you would meet, that you
would both be bound to me, both have sold your souls for
something only the other could provide? When the truth is
so much easier than that—I put Henry in your path. I gave
him to you, wrapped and ribboned like a gift.”
“Why?” she asks, throat closing around the word. “Why
would you do that?”
“Because it’s what you wanted. You were so set upon your
need for love, you could not see beyond it. I gave you this, I

567

gave you him, so you could see that love was not worth the
space you held for it. The space you kept from me.”
“But it was worth it. It is.”
He reaches out to brush her cheek. “It won’t be, when
he’s gone.”
Addie pulls away. From his words, his touch. “This is cruel,
Luc. Even for you.”
“No,” he snarls. “Cruelty would be ten years instead of
one. Cruelty would be to let you have a lifetime with him,
and have to suﬀer more for losing.”
“I would choose it anyway!” She shakes her head. “You
never intended to let him live, did you?”
Luc inclines his head. “A deal is a deal, Adeline. And deals
are binding.”
“That you would do all this to torment me—”
“No,” he snaps. “I did it to show you. To make you
understand. You put them on such a pedestal, but humans
are brief and pale and so is their love. It is shallow, it does
not last. You long for human love, but you are not human,
Adeline. You haven’t been for centuries. You have no place
with them. You belong with me.”
Addie recoils, anger hardening to ice inside her.
“What a hard lesson it must be for you,” she says. “That
you can’t have everything you want.”
“Want?” he sneers. “Want is for children. If this were
want, I would be rid of you by now. I would have forgotten
you centuries ago,” he says, a bitter loathing in his voice.
“This is need. And need is painful but patient. Do you hear
me, Adeline? I need you. As you need me. I love you, as you
love me.”
She hears the pain in his voice.
Perhaps that is why she wants to hurt him worse.
He taught her well, to ﬁnd the weakness in the armor.

568

“But that’s the thing, Luc,” she says, “I don’t love you at
all.”
The words are soft, steady, and yet they rumble through
the dark. The trees rustle, and the shadows thicken, and
Luc’s eyes burn a shade she’s never seen before. A
venomous color. And for the ﬁrst time in centuries, she is
afraid.
“Does he mean so much to you?” he asks, voice ﬂat and
hard as river stones. “Then go. Spend time with your human
love. Bury him, and mourn him, and plant a tree over his
grave.” His edges begin to blur into the dark. “I will still be
here,” he says. “And so will you.”
Luc turns away, and is gone.
Addie sinks to her knees in the grass.
She stays there until the ﬁrst threads of light seep into
the sky, and then, at last, she forces herself up again, walks
to the subway in a fog, Luc’s words looping through her
head.
You are not human, Adeline.
You thought you found each other?
You must have thought yourselves so clever.
Spend time with your love.
I will still be here.
And so will you.
The sun is rising by the time she gets to Brooklyn.
She stops to pick up breakfast, a concession, an apology,
for staying away all night. And that is when she sees the
paper stacked against the newsstand. That is when she sees
the date stamped in the upper corner.
August 6, 2014.
She left the apartment on the 30th of July.
Spend time with your love, he said.
But Luc has taken it. He didn’t just steal a night. He took
an entire week. Seven precious days, erased from her life …

569

and Henry’s.
Addie runs.
She stumbles through the door, and up the stairs, turns
out her purse, but the key is gone, and she pounds on the
door, terror surging through her that the world has changed,
that Luc has somehow rewritten more than time, somehow
taken more, taken everything.
But then the lock slides, and the door falls open, and
there is Henry, exhausted, disheveled, and she knows, by
the look in his eyes, that he did not expect her to come
back. That at some point, between the ﬁrst morning and the
next, and the next, and the next, he thought she was gone.
Addie throws her arms around him now.
“I’m so sorry,” she says, and it is not just for the stolen
week.
It is for the deal, the curse, the fact it is her fault.
“I’m sorry,” she says, over and over, and Henry doesn’t
shout, doesn’t rage, doesn’t even say I told you so. He
simply holds her tight, and says, “Enough,” says, “Promise
me,” says, “Stay.”
And none of them are questions, but she knows he is
asking, pleading with her to let it go, to stop ﬁghting, stop
trying to change their fates, and just be with him until the
end.
And Addie cannot bear the thought of giving up, of giving
in, of going down without a ﬁght.
But Henry is breaking, and it is her fault, and so, in the
end, she agrees.

570

New York City
August 2014

XVI
These are the happiest days of Henry’s life.
It is an odd thing to say, he knows.
But there is a strange freedom to it, a peculiar comfort in
the knowing. The end is rushing up to meet him, and yet, he
does not feel like he is falling toward it.
He knows he should be scared.
Every day he braces for the restless terror, waits for the
storm clouds to roll in, expects the inevitable panic to climb
inside his chest, pry him apart.
But for the ﬁrst time in months, in years, in as long as he
can remember, he is not afraid. He is worried about his
friends, of course, about the bookstore, and the cat. But
beyond the low hum of concern is only a strange calm, a
steadiness, and the incredible relief that he found Addie,
that he got to know her, to love her, to have her here beside
him.
He is happy.
He is ready.
He is not afraid.
That is what he tells himself.
He is not afraid.

They decide to go upstate.
571

To get out of the city, away from the stagnant summer
heat.
To see the stars.
He rents a car, and they drive north, and he realizes,
halfway up the Hudson, that Addie has never met his family,
and then he realizes, with a sudden, sinking weight, that he
is not supposed to go home until Rosh Hashanah, and that
he will be gone by then. That if he does not take this exit, he
will never get a chance to say good-bye.
And then, the clouds begin to roll in, and fear tries to
climb inside his chest, because he doesn’t know what he
would say, he doesn’t know what good it would do.
And then he is past the exit, then it is too late, and he can
breathe again, and Addie is pointing to a sign for fresh fruit,
and they pull oﬀ the freeway and buy peaches from the
stand, and sandwiches from the market, and drive an hour
north to a state park, where the sun is hot but the shade
beneath the trees is cool, and they spend the day
wandering the woodland paths, and when night falls they
make a picnic on the roof of the rented car, and stretch out
between the wild, weedy grass and the stars.
So many, the night doesn’t seem that dark.
And he is still happy.
And he can still breathe.
They have no tent, but it is too hot for covers anyway.
They lie on a blanket in the grass, and look up at the
ghost of the Milky Way, and he thinks of the Artifact on the
High Line, the exhibit of the sky, how close the stars felt
then, and now, how far away.
“If you could do it again,” he says, “would you still make
the deal?”
And Addie says yes.
It has been a hard and lonely life, she says, and a
wonderful one, too. She has lived through wars, and fought

572

in them, witnessed revolution and rebirth. She has left her
mark on a thousand works of art, like a thumbprint in the
bottom of a drying bowl. She has seen marvels, and gone
mad, has danced in snowbanks and frozen to death along
the Seine. She fell in love with the darkness many times, fell
in love with a human once.
And she is tired. Unspeakably tired.
But there is no question she has lived.
“Nothing is all good or all bad,” she says. “Life is so much
messier than that.”
And there in the dark, he asks if it was really worth it.
Were the instants of joy worth the stretches of sorrow?
Were the moments of beauty worth the years of pain?
And she turns her head, and looks at him, and says,
“Always.”
They fall asleep beneath the stars, and when they wake
up in the morning, the heat has leaked away, the air is cool,
the ﬁrst whispers of another season, the ﬁrst one he won’t
see, waiting in the distance.
And still, he tells himself, he is not afraid.

And then the weeks turn into days.
There are some good-byes he has to make.
He meets Bea and Robbie at the Merchant one night.
Addie sits across the bar, sipping a soda and giving him
space. He wants her there, he needs her there, a silent
anchor in the storm. But they both know that if she were at
the table with him, Bea and Robbie might forget, and he
needs them to remember.
And for a little while, everything is wonderfully, painfully
normal.
Bea talks about her latest thesis proposal, and apparently
ninth time’s the charm, because it’s been approved, and
573

Robbie talks about the show’s premiere next week, and
Henry does not tell him that he snuck into a dress rehearsal
yesterday, that he and Addie lurked in the last row of seats,
slouched low so he could watch Robbie on the stage,
brilliant, and beautiful, and in his element, lounging on his
throne with Bowie’s ﬂare, and a devil’s grin, and a magic all
his own.
And at last, Henry lies, and tells them he is going out of
town.
Upstate, to see his parents. No, it is not time, he says, but
he has cousins visiting, his mother asked. Just for the
weekend, he says.
He asks Bea if she can work the store.
Asks Robbie if he will feed the cat.
And they say yes, as simple as that, because they do not
know it is good-bye. Henry pays the tab, and Robbie jokes,
and Bea complains about her undergrads, and Henry tells
them he’ll call when he gets back.
And when he gets up to go, Bea kisses his cheek, and he
pulls Robbie in for a hug, and Robbie says he better not miss
his show, and Henry promises he won’t, and then they are
going, they are gone.
And this, he decides, is what a good-bye should be.
Not a period, but an ellipsis, a statement trailing oﬀ, until
someone is there to pick it up.
It is a door left open.
It is drifting oﬀ to sleep.
And he tells himself he is not afraid.
Tells himself it is okay, he is okay.
And just when he begins to doubt, Addie’s hand is there,
soft and steady on his arm, leading him back home. And
they climb into bed, and curl into each other against the
storm.

574

And sometime in the middle of the night, he feels her get
up, hears her padding down the hall.
But it is late, and he thinks nothing of it.
He rolls over, and goes back to sleep, and when he wakes
again it is still dark, and she is back beside him in the bed.
And the watch on the table twitches one step closer to
midnight.

575

New York City
September 4, 2014

XVII
It is such an ordinary day.
They stay in bed, curled together in the nest of sheets,
head to head and hands trailing over arms, along cheeks,
ﬁngers memorizing skin. He whispers her name, over and
over, as if she can save the sound, bottle it up to use when
he is gone.
Addie, Addie, Addie.
And despite it all, Henry is happy.
Or at least, he tells himself he is happy, tells himself he is
ready, tells himself he isn’t afraid. And he tells himself that
if they just stay here, in the bed, the day will last. If he holds
his breath, he can keep the seconds from moving forward,
pin the minutes between their tangled ﬁngers.
It is an unspoken plea but Addie seems to sense it,
because she makes no motion to get up. Instead, she stays
with him in bed, and tells him stories.
Not of anniversaries—they have run out of July 29ths—but
of Septembers and Mays, of quiet days, the kind no one else
would remember. She tells him of fairy pools on the Isle of
Skye, and the Northern Lights in Iceland, of swimming in a
lake so clear she could see the bottom ten meters down, in
Portugal—or was it Spain?
These are the only stories he will never write down.

576

It is his own failing; he cannot bring himself to unfold, to
let go of Addie’s hands and climb out of the bed, and grab
the latest notebook from the shelf—there are six of them
now, the last only half-ﬁlled, and he realizes it will stay that
way, those last blank pages, his cramped cursive like a wall,
a false end to an ongoing story, and his heart skips a little, a
tiny stutter of panic, but he can’t let it start, knows it will
tear through him, the way a shiver turns a momentary chill
into teeth-chattering cold, and he cannot lose his hold, not
yet, not yet.
Not yet.
So Addie talks, and he listens, letting the stories slide like
ﬁngers through his hair. And every time the panic tries to
ﬁght its way to the surface, he ﬁghts it back, holds his
breath and tells himself he is ﬁne, but he doesn’t move,
doesn’t get up. He cannot, because if he does, it will break
the spell, and time will race forward and it will be over too
fast.
It is a silly thing, he knows, a strange surge of
superstition, but the fear is there now, real now, and the
bed is safe, and Addie is steady, and he is so glad she is
here, so glad for every minute since they met.
Sometime in the afternoon, he is suddenly hungry.
Famished.
He shouldn’t be. It feels frivolous, and wrong,
inconsequential now, but the hunger is swift and deep, and
with its arrival, the clock begins to tick.
He can’t hold time at bay.
It is racing forward now, rushing away.
And Addie looks at him as if she can read his mind, see
the storm building in his head. But she is sunshine. She is
clear skies.
She draws him out of bed, and into the kitchen, and
Henry sits on a stool and listens as she makes an omelet

577

and tells him about the ﬁrst time she ﬂew a plane, heard a
song on the radio, saw a moving picture.
This is the last gift she can give him, these moments he
will never have.
And this is the last gift he can give her, the listening.
And he wishes they could climb back into bed with Book,
but they both know there’s no going back. And now that
he’s up, he cannot bear the stillness. He is all restless
energy, and urgent need, and there isn’t enough time, and
he knows of course that there will never be.
That time always ends a second before you’re ready.
That life is the minutes you want minus one.
And so they get dressed, and they go out, and walk,
wearing circles into the block as the panic begins to win. It
is a hand pressing against weakened glass, a steady
pressure on spreading cracks, but Addie is there, her ﬁngers
laced through his.
“Do you know how you live three hundred years?” she
says.
And when he asks how, she smiles. “The same way you
live one. A second at a time.”
And eventually his legs are tired, and the restlessness
recedes, doesn’t vanish but dulls to a manageable degree,
and they go to the Merchant, and order food they do not
eat, and order beers they do not drink because he cannot
bear to dull these last few hours, as frightening as it is to
face them sober.
And he makes some comment about his last meal, laughs
at the morbid thought of it, and Addie’s smile falters, for just
a second, and then he is apologizing, he is sorry, and she is
folding herself around him, and the panic has its claws in
him.
The storm is brewing in his head, churning the sky on the
horizon, but he doesn’t ﬁght it.

578

He lets it come.
Only when it starts raining does he realize the storm is
real.
He tips his head back, and feels the drip of rain on his
cheeks, and thinks of the night they went to the Fourth Rail,
the downpour that caught them breathless when they
reached the street. He thinks of that before he thinks of the
rooftop, and that is something.
He feels so far from the Henry who climbed up there a
year ago—or perhaps he’s not that far at all. It is only a
matter of steps, after all, from the street to the edge.
But what he would give to go back down.
God, what he would give for just another day.
The sun is gone now, the light going thin, and he will
never see it again, and the fear crashes into him, sudden
and traitorous. It is a gust of wind, cutting through a too-still
scene. He ﬁghts it back, not yet, not yet, not yet, and Addie
squeezes his hand, so he won’t blow away.
“Stay with me,” she says, and he answers, “I’m here.”
His ﬁngers tighten on hers.
He doesn’t have to ask, she doesn’t have to answer.
There is an unspoken agreement that she will be there,
with him, until the very end.
That this time, he won’t be alone.
And he is okay.
It is okay.
It will be okay.

579

XVIII
It is almost time, and they are on the roof.
The same roof he nearly stepped oﬀ a year before, the
same one where he stood with the devil and made his deal.
It is a full-circle moment, and he doesn’t know if it has to be
here, if he has to be here, but it feels right.
Addie’s hand is linked in his, and that feels right, too.
A grounding force against a rising storm.
There is still a little time, the hand on the watch a fraction
of a fraction of a fraction from midnight, and he can hear
Bea’s voice in his head.
Only you would arrive early to your own death.
And Henry smiles, despite himself, and wishes he had
said more to Bea, and Robbie, but the simple fact is he
didn’t trust himself. He has made his good-byes, though
they will not know it until he’s gone, and he is sorry for that,
for them, for whatever pain he might cause. He is glad they
have each other.
Addie’s hand tightens in his.
It is almost time, and he wonders what it will feel like, to
lose a soul.
If it will be like a heart attack, sudden and violent, or as
easy as falling asleep. Death takes so many forms. Perhaps
this does, too. Will the darkness appear and reach a hand
into his chest, and pull his soul out between his ribs like a

580

magic trick? Or will some force compel him to ﬁnish what he
started? To walk to the edge of the roof, and step oﬀ? Will
he be found on the street below, as if he’d jumped?
Or will they ﬁnd him up here, on the roof?
He does not know.
He does not need to know.
He is ready.
He is not ready.
He wasn’t ready last year on the roof, when the stranger
held out his hand. He wasn’t ready then, and he isn’t ready
now, and he is beginning to suspect no one is ever ready,
not when the moment comes, not when the darkness
reaches out to claim its prize.
Music streams, thin and tinny, through a neighbor’s open
window, and Henry pulls his thoughts back from death, and
the edge of the roof, to the girl with her hand in his, the one
telling him to dance with her.
He pulls her close, and she smells of summer, she smells
of time, she smells of home.
“I’m here,” she says.
Addie has promised to stay with him until the end.
The end. The end. The end.
It echoes through his head like the striking of a clock, but
it’s not time, he still has time, though it is vanishing so fast.
They teach you growing up that you are only one thing at
a time—angry, lonely, content—but he’s never found that to
be true. He is a dozen things at once. He is lost and scared
and grateful, he is sorry and happy and afraid.
But he is not alone.
It is beginning to rain again, the air gone damp with the
metallic scent of storms in the city, and Henry doesn’t care,
thinks there is something to be said for symmetry.
They turn in a slow circle on the roof.

581

He has not slept well in days, and it has made his legs
heavy, his mind too slow, the minutes speeding up around
him, and he wishes the music were louder, wishes the sky
were lighter, wishes he had just a little more time.
No one is ever ready to die.
Even when they think they want to.
No one is ready.
He isn’t ready.
But it is time.
It is time.
Addie is saying something, but the watch has stopped
moving, it hangs weightless on him now, and it is time, and
he can feel himself slipping, can feel the edges of his mind
going soft, the night heavy, and any moment the stranger
will step out of the dark.
Addie is guiding his face to hers, she is saying something,
and he doesn’t want to listen, he’s afraid it’s a good-bye, he
just wants to hold on to this moment, to make it last, to will
it still, turn the ﬁlm into a freeze frame, let that be the end,
not darkness, not nothing, just a permanent moment. A
memory, trapped in amber, in glass, in time.
But she is still speaking.
“You promised you would listen,” she says, “you promised
you would write it down.”
He doesn’t understand. The journals are on the shelf. He
has written her story—every part.
“I did,” he says. “I did.”
But Addie is shaking her head.
“Henry,” she says. “I haven’t told you how it ends.”

582

New York City
September 1, 2014
(3 nights until the end)

XIX
Some decisions happen all at once.
And others build up over time.
A girl makes a deal with the darkness, after years of
dreaming.
A girl falls in love with a boy in a moment, and resolves to
set him free.
Addie doesn’t know exactly when she decided.
Perhaps she has known since the night Luc walked back
into their lives.
Or perhaps she has known since the night he wrote her
name.
Or perhaps she has known since he said those words:
I remember you.
She isn’t sure.
It doesn’t matter.
What matters is that, three nights before the end, Addie
slips out of bed. Henry rolls over in his sleep, wakes enough
to hear her padding down the hall, but not enough to hear
her put on her shoes, or slip out into the dark.
It is almost two—that time between very late, and very
early—and even Brooklyn has quieted to a murmur as she
walks the two blocks to the Merchant bar. It is an hour until
closing, the crowd thinned to a few determined drinkers.

583

Addie takes a stool at the bar, and orders a shot of
tequila. She’s never been one for hard liquor, but she downs
the drink in one, feels the warmth settle in her chest as she
reaches into her pocket and ﬁnds the ring.
Her ﬁngers curl around the wooden band.
She draws it out, balances the ring upright on the counter.
She spins it like a coin, but there are no heads or tails, no
yes or no, no choice beyond the one she’s already made.
She decides that when it settles, she will put it on. When it
falls—but as it begins to wobble and tip, a hand comes down
on top of it, pressing it ﬂat against the bar.
The hand is smooth and strong, the ﬁngers long, the
details just as she once drew them. “Shouldn’t you be with
your love?”
There is no humor in Luc’s eyes. They are ﬂat, and dark.
“He’s sleeping,” she says, “and I cannot.” Luc’s hand has
withdrawn, and Addie looks at the pale circle of the ring still
on the counter.
“Adeline,” he says, stroking her hair. “It will hurt. And it
will pass. All things do.”
“Except for us,” she murmurs. And then she adds, as if to
herself, “I am glad it was only a year.”
Luc sinks onto the stool beside her. “And how was it, your
human love? Was it everything you dreamed of?”
“No,” she says, and it is the truth.
It was messy. It was hard. It was wonderful, and strange,
and frightening, and fragile—so fragile it hurt—and it was
worth every single moment. She does not tell him any of
that. Instead, she lets the “no” hang in the air between
them, heavy with the weight of Luc’s assumption. His eyes,
such a smug shade of green.
“But Henry doesn’t deserve to die to prove your point.”
The arrogance ﬂickers, cut through with anger.
“A deal is a deal,” he says. “It cannot be broken.”

584

“And yet, you told me once that a deal could be bent, the
terms rewritten. Did you mean it? Or was it just part of the
ploy to get me to surrender?”
Luc’s expression darkens. “There was no ploy, Adeline.
But if you think I’ll change the terms of his—”
Addie shakes her head. “I’m not talking about Henry’s
deal,” she says. “I’m talking about mine.” She has practiced
the words, but they still tumble awkwardly oﬀ her tongue.
“I’m not asking for your mercy, and I know you have no
charity. So I’m oﬀering a trade. Let Henry go. Let him live.
Let him remember me, and—”
“You would surrender your soul?” There is a shadow in his
gaze when he says it, a hesitation in the words, less want
than worry, and she knows then, she has him.
“No,” she says. “But only because you do not want it.”
And before he can protest, she continues, “You want me.”
Luc says nothing, but his eyes brighten, his interest
piqued.
“You were right,” she says. “I am not one of them. Not
anymore. And I am tired of losing. Tired of mourning
everything I ever try to love.” She reaches out to touch
Luc’s cheek. “But I won’t lose you. And you won’t lose me.
So yes.” She looks straight into his eyes. “Do this, and I will
be yours, as long as you want me by your side.”
He seems to hold his breath, but she’s the one who
cannot breathe. The world tips, falters, threatening to fall.
And then, at last, Luc smiles, his green eyes emerald with
victory.
“I accept.”
She lets herself fold, bows her head against his chest in
relief. And then his ﬁngers come up beneath her chin,
tipping her face to his, and he kisses her the way he did the
night they met, swift, and deep, and hungry, and Addie feels

585

his teeth skate across her bottom lip, the taste of copper
blossom on her tongue.
And she knows that it is done.

586

New York City
September 4, 2014

XX
“No,” says Henry, the word half-swallowed by the storm.
The rain falls hard and fast on the roof. On them.
The clock has stopped, the hand thrown up in surrender.
But he is still there.
“You can’t do this,” he says, head spinning. “I won’t let
you.”
Addie ﬂashes him a pitying look, because of course, he
cannot stop her.
No one has ever been able to.
Estele used to say she was stubborn as a stone.
But even stones wear away to nothing.
And she has not.
“You can’t do this,” he says again, and she says, “It is
already done,” and Henry feels dizzy, feels sick, feels the
ground sway beneath him.
“Why?” he pleads. “Why would you do it?”
“Think of it as a thank-you,” she says, “for seeing me. For
showing me what it’s like to be seen. To be loved. Now you
get a second chance. But you have to let them see you as
you are. You have to ﬁnd people who see you.”
It is wrong.
It is all wrong.
“You don’t love him.”
A sad smile crosses her face.

587

“I’ve had my share of love,” she says, and it is time, it
must be time, because his vision is blurring, the edges going
black.
“Listen to me.” Her voice is urgent now. “Life can feel
very long sometimes, but in the end, it goes so fast.” Her
eyes are glassy with tears, but she is smiling. “You better
live a good life, Henry Strauss.”
She begins to pull away, but his grip tightens. “No.”
She sighs, ﬁngers threading through his hair. “You’ve
given me so much, Henry. But I need you to do one more
thing.” Her forehead presses against his. “I need you to
remember.”
And he can feel his hold slipping as darkness washes
across his vision, blotting out the skyline and the roof and
the girl folding herself against him.
“Promise me,” she says, and her face is beginning to
smudge, the swipe of her lips, brown curls in a heart-shaped
face, two wide eyes, seven freckles like stars.
“Promise,” she whispers, and he is just lifting his hands,
to hold her against him, to promise, but by the time his
arms close around her, she is gone.
And he is falling.

588

589

PART SEVEN
I REMEMBER YOU

590

Title of Piece: The Girl Who Got Away
Artist: Unknown
Date: 2014
Medium: Polaroid
Location: On loan from the personal archives of Henry Strauss
Description: Collection of six (6) photographs depicting a girl in
motion, her features erased, obscured, or otherwise unreadable. The
ﬁnal photo is diﬀerent. It features a living room ﬂoor, the edge of a
table, a pile of books, only a pair of feet visible at the bottom.
Background: The subject of the photos remains a topic of intense
speculation, given the author’s relationship to the source material. The
ﬂash has erased all meaningful details, but the medium is what makes
the pieces remarkable. In standard photography, long exposure would
make it possible to achieve the desired eﬀect of motion, but the
Polaroid’s ﬁxed shutter speed makes the illusion of movement all the
more impressive.
Estimated Value: Not for sale
All works currently on display at the Modern Museum of Art exhibit In
Search of the Real Addie LaRue curated by Beatrice Caldwell, PhD,
Columbia.

591

New York City
September 5, 2014

I
This is how it ends.
A boy wakes up alone in bed.
Sunlight spills through the gap in the curtains, the
buildings beyond slick with the aftermath of rain.
He feels sluggish, hungover, still caught within the dregs
of sleep. He knows he was dreaming, but he can’t for the
life of him remember the details of the dream, and it must
not have been very pleasant, because he feels only a deep
relief at waking.
Book looks over the mound of the comforter, orange eyes
wide and waiting.
It’s late, the boy can tell by the angle of the light, the
sounds of traﬃc on the street.
He didn’t mean to sleep so long.
The girl he loves is always the ﬁrst to wake. Shuﬄing
beneath the sheets, the weight of her attention, the soft
touch of her ﬁngers on his skin—they are always enough to
rouse him out of sleep. Only once did he wake ﬁrst, and
then he had the strange pleasure of seeing her, knees
curled up and face tucked against the pillows, still beneath
the surface of sleep.
But that was a rainy morning just after dawn, when the
world was gray, and today the sun is so bright he doesn’t
know how either of them slept through it.

592

He rolls over to wake her.
But the other side of the bed is empty.
He splays his hand over the place where she should be,
but the sheets are cold and smooth.
“Addie?” he calls, rising to his feet.
He moves through the apartment, checks the kitchen, the
bathroom, the ﬁre escape, even though he knows, he
knows, he knows, that she is not there.
“Addie?”
And then, of course, he remembers.
Not the dream, there was no dream, only the night
before.
The last night of his life.
The damp concrete smell of the rooftop, the last tick of
the watch as its hand found twelve, her smile as she looked
up into his face, and made him promise to remember.
And now he’s here, and she’s gone, and there’s no trace
of her left behind except the stuﬀ in his head and—
The journals.
He’s up, crossing the room to the narrow set of shelves
where he kept them: red, blue, silver, black, white, green;
six notebooks, all of them still there. He pulls them from the
shelf, spreads them on the bed, and as he does, the
Polaroids tumble out.
The one he took that day of Addie, her face a blur, her
back to the camera, a ghost at the edges of the frame, and
he stares at them a long time, convinced that if he squints,
she will come into focus. But no matter how long he looks,
all he can see are the shapes, the shadows. The only thing
he can make out are the seven freckles, and those are so
faint he can’t tell if they’re really visible, or his memory is
simply ﬁlling them in where they should be.
He sets the photograph aside and reaches for the ﬁrst
journal, then stops, so convinced that if and when he opens

593

it, he will ﬁnd the pages blank, the ink erased like every
other mark she tried to make.
But he has to look, and so he does, and there they are,
page after page written in his slanting script, shielded from
the curse by the fact the words themselves are his, though
the story is hers.
She wants to be a tree.
There is nothing wrong with Roger.
She simply wants to live before she dies.
It will take her years to learn the language of those eyes.
She claws her way up, and out, hands splayed across the
bony mound of a dead man’s back.
This is her ﬁrst. How it should have been.
She feels him press three coins into her hand.
Soul is such a grand word. The truth is so much smaller.
It does not take her long to ﬁnd her father’s grave.
He picks up the next journal.
Paris is burning.
The darkness comes undone.
And the next.
There is an angel above the bar.
Henry sits there for hours against the side of the bed,
turning through every page of every book, every story she
ever told, and when he’s done, he closes his eyes, and puts
his head in his hands amid the open books.
Because the girl he loved is gone.
And he’s still here.
He remembers everything.

594

Brooklyn, New York
March 13, 2015

II
“Henry Samuel Strauss, this is bullshit.”
Bea slams the last page down on the coﬀee counter,
startling the cat, who’d drifted oﬀ on a nearby tower of
books. “You can’t end it there.” She’s clutching the rest of
the manuscript to her chest, as if to shield it from him. The
title page stares back at him.
The Invisible Life of Addie LaRue.
“What happened to her? Did she really go with Luc? After
all that?”
Henry shrugs. “I assume so.”
“You assume so?”
The truth is, he doesn’t know.
He’s spent the last six months trying to transcribe the
stories in the notebooks, to compile them into this draft.
And every night, after his hands had cramped and his head
had begun to ache from staring at the computer screen,
he’d collapse into bed—it does not smell like her, not
anymore—and wonder how it ends.
If it ends.
He wrote a dozen diﬀerent endings for the book, ones
where she was happy, and ones where she was not, ones
where she and Luc were madly in love, and ones where he
clung to her like a dragon with its treasure, but those
endings all belonged to him, and not to her. Those are his

595

story, and this is hers. And anything he wrote beyond those
last shared seconds, that ﬁnal kiss, would be ﬁction.
He tried.
But this is real—though no one else will ever know it.
He does not know what happened to Addie, where she
went, how she is, but he can hope. He hopes she is happy.
He hopes she is still brimming with deﬁant joy, and stubborn
hope. He hopes she did not do it just for him. He hopes,
somehow, one day, he’ll see her again.
“You’re really going to method actor this shit, aren’t you?”
says Bea.
Henry looks up.
He wants to tell her it’s all true.
That she met Addie, just like he wrote, that she said the
same thing every time. He wants to tell her that they would
have been friends. That they were, in that ﬁrst-night-of-therest-of-our-lives kind of way. Which was, of course, as much
as Addie ever got.
But she wouldn’t believe him, so he lets it live for her as
ﬁction.
“Did you like it?” he asks.
And Bea breaks into a grin. There is no fog in her eyes
now, no shine, and he has never been more grateful to have
the truth.
“It’s good, Henry,” she says. “It’s really, really good.” She
taps the title page. “Just make sure you thank me in the
acknowledgments.”
“What?”
“My thesis. Remember? I wanted to do it on the girl in
those pieces. The ghost in the frame. That’s her, isn’t it?”
And of course, it is.
Henry runs his hand over the manuscript, relieved and
sad that it is done. He wishes he could have lived with it a
little longer, wishes he could have lived with her.

596

But now, he is glad to have it.
Because the truth is, he is already beginning to forget.
It’s not that he’s fallen victim to her curse. She has not
been erased in any way. The details are simply fading, as all
things do, glossing over by degrees, the mind loosening its
hold on the past to make way for the future.
But he doesn’t want to let go.
He is trying not to let go.
He lies in bed at night, and closes his eyes, and tries to
conjure her face. The exact curve of her mouth, the speciﬁc
shade of her hair, the way the bedside lamp lit against her
left cheekbone, her temple, her chin. The sound of her
laughter late at night, her voice when she was on the edge
of sleep.
He knows these details are not as important as the ones
in the book, but he still can’t bear to lose them yet.
Belief is a bit like gravity. Enough people believe a thing,
and it becomes as solid and real as the ground beneath your
feet. But when you’re the only one holding on to an idea, a
memory, a girl, it’s hard to keep it from ﬂoating away.
“I knew you were going to be a writer,” Bea is saying. “All
the trappings, you’ve just been living in denial.”
“I’m not a writer,” he says absently.
“Tell that to the book. You’re going to sell it, right? You
have to—it’s too good.”
“Oh. Yeah,” he says thoughtfully. “I think I’d like to try.”
And he will.
He will get an agent, and the book will go to auction, and
in the end he’ll sell the work on one condition—that there is
only one name on the cover, and it is not his—and in the
end, they will agree. They’ll think it some clever marketing
trick, no doubt, but his heart will thrill at the thought of
other people reading these words—not his, but hers, of her
name carried from lips to lips, from mind to memory.

597

Addie, Addie, Addie.
The advance will be enough to pay oﬀ his student loans,
enough to let him breathe a little while he ﬁgures out what
he’s going to do next. He doesn’t know yet what that is, but
for the ﬁrst time, it doesn’t scare him.
The world is wide, and he’s seen so little of it with his own
eyes. He wants to travel, to take photos, listen to other
people’s stories, maybe make some of his own. After all, life
seems very long sometimes, but he knows it will go so fast,
and he doesn’t want to miss a moment.

598

London, England
February 3, 2016

III
The bookstore is about to close.
It gets dark early this time of year, and there’s snow in
the forecast, which is rare for London. The various clerks
bustle about, dismantling old displays and putting up new
ones, trying to ﬁnish their work before the mist outside
turns to frost.
She lingers nearby, thumb skating along the ring at her
throat as a pair of teenage girls restock a wall in New
Fiction.
“Have you read it yet?” asks one.
“Yeah, this weekend,” says the other.
“I can’t believe the author didn’t put their name on it,”
says the ﬁrst. “Must be some kind of PR stunt.”
“I don’t know,” says the second. “I think it’s charming.
Makes the whole thing feel real. Like it’s really Henry, telling
her story.”
The ﬁrst girl laughs. “You’re such a romantic.”
“Excuse me,” cuts in an older man. “Could I grab a copy
of Addie LaRue?”
Her skin prickles. He says the name with so much ease.
Sounds tripping oﬀ a foreign tongue.
She waits until the three of them have moved oﬀ to the
till, and then, at last, she approaches the display. It is not
just a table, but a full shelf, thirty copies of the book, faced

599

out, the pattern repeating down the wall. The covers are
simple, most of the space given over to the title, which is
long and large enough to ﬁll the jacket. It’s written in
cursive, just like the notes in the journals by the bed, a more
legible version of her words in Henry’s hand.
The Invisible Life of Addie LaRue.
She runs her ﬁngers over the name, feels the embossed
letters arc and curve beneath her touch, as though she had
written them herself.
The shop girls are right. There is no author’s name. No
photo on the back. No sign of Henry Strauss, beyond the
simple, beautiful fact that the book is in her hands, the story
real.
She peels back the cover, turns past the title to the
dedication.
Three small words rest in the center of the page.
I remember you.
She closes her eyes, and sees him as he was that ﬁrst day
in the store, elbows leaning on the counter as he looked up,
and frowned at her behind his glasses.
I remember you.
Sees him at Artifact, in the mirrors and then in the ﬁeld of
stars, sees his ﬁngers tracing her name on the glass wall,
and peering over a Polaroid, whispering across Grand
Central and head bowed over the journal, black curls falling
into his face. Sees him lying next to her in bed, in the grass
upstate, on the beach, their ﬁngers hooked like links in a
chain.
Feels the warm circle of his arms as he pulled her back
beneath the covers, the clean scent of him, the ease in his
voice when she said, Don’t forget, and he said, Never.
She smiles, brushing away tears, as she sees him on the
roof that ﬁnal night.

600

Addie has said so many hellos, but that was the ﬁrst and
only time she got to say good-bye. That kiss, like a piece of
long-awaited punctuation. Not the em dash of an
interrupted line, or the ellipsis of a quiet escape, but a
period, a closed parenthesis, an end.
An end.
That is the thing about living in the present, and only the
present, it is a run-on sentence. And Henry was a perfect
pause in the story. A chance to catch her breath. She does
not know if it was love, or simply a reprieve. If contentment
can compete with passion, if warmth will ever be as strong
as heat.
But it was a gift.
Not a game, or a war, not a battle of wills.
Just a gift.
Time, and memory, like lovers in a fable.
She thumbs through the chapters of the book, her book,
and marvels at the sight of her name on every page. Her
life, waiting to be read. It is bigger than her now. Bigger
than either of them, humans, or gods, or things without
names. A story is an idea, wild as a weed, springing up
wherever it is planted.
She begins to read, makes it as far her ﬁrst winter in Paris
when she feels the air change at her back.
Hears the name, like a kiss, at the nape of her neck.
“Adeline.”
And then Luc is there. His arms fold around her shoulders,
and she leans back against his chest. They do ﬁt together.
They always have, though she wonders, even now, if it’s
simply the nature of what he is, smoke expanding to ﬁll
whatever space it is given.
His eyes drop to the book in her hands. Her name
splashed across the cover.

601

“How clever you are,” he says, murmuring the words into
her skin. But he does not seem angry.
“They can have the story,” he says. “So long as I have
you.”
She twists in his arms to look at him.
Luc is beautiful when he is gloating.
He shouldn’t be, of course. Arrogance is an unattractive
trait, but Luc wears it with all the comfort of a tailored suit.
He glows with the light of his own work. He is so used to
being right. To being in control.
His eyes are a bright, triumphant green.
Three hundred years she’s had to learn the color of his
moods. She knows them all by now, the meaning of every
shade, knows his temper, wants, and thoughts, just by
studying those eyes.
She marvels, that in the same amount of time, he never
learned to read her own.
Or perhaps he saw only what he expected: a woman’s
anger, and her need, her fear and hope and lust, all the
simpler, more transparent things.
But he never learned to read her cunning, or her
cleverness, never learned to read the nuances of her
actions, the subtle rhythms of her speech.
And as she looks at him, she thinks of all the things her
eyes would say.
That he has made a grand mistake.
That the devil is in the details, and he has overlooked a
crucial one.
That semantics may seem small, but he taught her once
that words were everything. And when she carved the terms
of her new deal, when she traded her soul for herself, she
did not say forever, but as long as you want me by your
side.
And those are not the same at all.

602

If her eyes could speak, they would laugh.
They would say that he is a ﬁckle god, and long before he
loved her, he hated her, he drove her mad, and with her
ﬂawless memory, she became a student of his
machinations, a scholar of his cruelty. She has had three
hundred years to study, and she will make a masterpiece of
his regret.
Perhaps it will take twenty years.
Perhaps it will take a hundred.
But he is not capable of love, and she will prove it.
She will ruin him. Ruin his idea of them.
She will break his heart, and he will come to hate her
once again.
She will drive him mad, drive him away.
And then, he will cast her oﬀ.
And she will ﬁnally be free.
Addie dreams of telling Luc these things, just to see the
shade it turns his eyes, the green of being bested. The
green of forfeit, and of losing.
But if he’s taught her anything, it’s patience.
So Addie says nothing of the new game, the new rules,
the new battle that’s begun.
She only smiles, and sets the book back on its shelf.
And follows him out into the dark.

603

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Anyone who follows me online knows I have a rather fraught
relationship with stories.
Or rather, with bringing them to life. With holding up the
whole messy beast until my arms shake and my head hurts
and I know if I drop it now, before it’s ready, it will shatter,
and I’ll have to sweep it up, and I’ll lose at least a few of the
pieces along the way.
And so, while I held up Addie’s story, so many people held
up me.
Without them, there would be no book.
This is where I’m supposed to acknowledge them all.
(I hate acknowledgments.)
(Or rather, I hate Acknowledgments. I have a terrible
memory. My mind, I think, has been burrowed full of holes
by all these books, so when it comes to thanking the people
who helped this book come into being, I freeze up, certain
that I’ll forget.)
(I know I’ll forget.)
(I am always forgetting.)
(I think that’s why I write, to try and catch the ideas
before they slip away and leave me staring oﬀ into space
wondering why I walked into this room, or why I opened that
browser tab, or what I was looking for in the fridge.)
(It’s ironic, of course, given the theme of this book.)
(This book, which lived in my head for so long, and took
up so much space, it’s responsible for at least some of the

604

forgetting.)
So, this will serve as an incomplete list.
This book is for my dad, who walked the streets of our
East Nashville neighborhood and listened while I ﬁrst spelled
out the idea growing in my head.
For my mum, who followed me down every winding road,
and never let me get lost.
For my sister, Jenna, who knew exactly when I needed to
write, and when I needed to stop writing and go get a fancy
cocktail instead.
For my agent, Holly, who has dragged me through so
many ﬁre swamps, and never once let me get singed or
drowned or eaten by ROUSes.
For my editor, Miriam, who was with me every step of the
long and winding way.
For my publicist, Kristin, who’s become my knight, my
champion, and my friend.
For Lucille, Sarah, Eileen, and the rest of my incredible
team at Tor, who believed in this story when it was an idea,
cheered me on when it was a draft, championed it when it
was a ﬁnished book, and made me feel, at every step, like I
could let go, and you would catch me.
For my friends—you know who you are—who dragged me
through the dark, and ran away with me in search of words
(and roast chicken).
For Al Mare, and Red Kite, for giving me a place to think,
and write, and supplying me with ample pots of tea.
For Danielle, Ilda, Britt, and Dan, for your passion, and for
sliding pizza under the door.
For every bookseller who has kept me on shelves this
long.
For every reader who told me they couldn’t wait, while
promising they would.

605

TOR BOOKS BY V. E. SCHWAB
Vicious
Vengeful
A Darker Shade of Magic
A Gathering of Shadows
A Conjuring of Light

606

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

VICTORIA “V. E.” SCHWAB is the #1 New York Times
bestselling author of more than a dozen books, including the
acclaimed Shades of Magic series, the Villains series, and
the Monsters of Verity duology. Her work has received
critical acclaim; been featured in The New York Times,
Entertainment Weekly, The Washington Post, and more;
been translated into more than a dozen languages; and
been optioned for television and ﬁlm. When she’s not
haunting Paris streets or trudging up English hillsides, she
lives in Edinburgh, Scotland, and is usually tucked in the
corner of a coﬀee shop, dreaming up monsters.
Twitter: @veschwab

607

Instagram: veschwab
Website: veschwab.com, or sign up for email updates here.

608

Thank you for buying this
Tom Doherty Associates ebook.
To receive special oﬀers, bonus content,
and info on new releases and other great reads,
sign up for our newsletters.

Or visit us online at
us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup
For email updates on the author, click here.

609

610

This is a work of ﬁction. All of the characters, organizations, and events
portrayed in this novel are either products of the author’s imagination or are
used ﬁctitiously.
THE INVISIBLE LIFE OF ADDIE LARUE

Copyright © 2020 by Victoria Schwab
All rights reserved.
Cover art by Will Staehle
Edited by Miriam Weinberg
Interior illustrations by Jennifer Hanover
A Tor Book
Published by Tom Doherty Associates
120 Broadway
New York, NY 10271
www.tor-forge.com
Tor® is a registered trademark of Macmillan Publishing Group, LLC.
The Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available upon request.
ISBN 978-0-7653-8756-1 (hardcover)
ISBN 978-1-250-79399-7 (signed edition)
ISBN 978-1-250-78453-7 (international, sold outside the U.S., subject to rights
availability)
ISBN 978-0-7653-8758-5 (ebook)
eISBN 9780765387585
Our ebooks may be purchased in bulk for promotional, educational, or business
use. Please contact the Macmillan Corporate and Premium Sales Department at
1-800-221-7945, extension 5442, or by email at
MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com.
First U.S. Edition: 2020
First International Edition: 2020

611

CONTENTS
Title Page
Copyright Notice
Dedication
Epigraph
Part One: The Gods That Answer After Dark
Chapter I
Chapter II
Chapter III
Chapter IV
Chapter V
Chapter VI
Chapter VII
Chapter VIII
Chapter IX
Chapter X
Chapter XI
Chapter XII
Chapter XIII
Chapter XIV
Chapter XV
Chapter XVI
Chapter XVII
Part Two: The Darkest Part of the Night
Chapter I
Chapter II
612

Chapter III
Chapter IV
Chapter V
Chapter VI
Chapter VII
Chapter VIII
Chapter IX
Chapter X
Chapter XI
Chapter XII
Chapter XIII
Chapter XIV
Part Three: Three Hundred Years—and Three Words
Chapter I
Chapter II
Chapter III
Chapter IV
Chapter V
Chapter VI
Chapter VII
Chapter VIII
Chapter IX
Chapter X
Chapter XI
Chapter XII
Chapter XIII
Part Four: The Man Who Stayed Dry in the Rain
Chapter I
Chapter II
Chapter III
Chapter IV
Chapter V
Chapter VI

613

Chapter VII
Chapter VIII
Chapter IX
Chapter X
Chapter XI
Chapter XII
Chapter XIII
Chapter XIV
Chapter XV
Chapter XVI
Chapter XVII
Chapter XVIII
Chapter XIX
Part Five: The Shadow Who Smiled and the Girl Who Smiled
Back
Chapter I
Chapter II
Chapter III
Chapter IV
Chapter V
Chapter VI
Chapter VII
Chapter VIII
Chapter IX
Chapter X
Chapter XI
Chapter XII
Chapter XIII
Chapter XIV
Chapter XV
Part Six: Do Not Pretend that This is Love
Chapter I
Chapter II

614

Chapter III
Chapter IV
Chapter V
Chapter VI
Chapter VII
Chapter VIII
Chapter IX
Chapter X
Chapter XI
Chapter XII
Chapter XIII
Chapter XIV
Chapter XV
Chapter XVI
Chapter XVII
Chapter XVIII
Chapter XIX
Chapter XX
Part Seven: I Remember You
Chapter I
Chapter II
Chapter III
Acknowledgments
Tor Books by V. E. Schwab
About the Author
Copyright

615

