DEDICATION

                            For Callaway,
         the boy who climbed into the tree house in my heart
                   and let me be the crown on his.
                      TABLE OF CONTENTS

Dedication

Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 9
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
Chapter 14
Chapter 15
Chapter 16
Chapter 17
Chapter 18
Chapter 19
Chapter 20
Chapter 21
Chapter 22
Chapter 23
Chapter 24
Chapter 25
Chapter 26
Chapter 27
Chapter 28
Chapter 29
Chapter 30
Chapter 31
Chapter 32
Epilogue

Acknowledgments
About the Author
Back Ads
Books by Kiera Cass
Credits
Copyright
About the Publisher
CHAPTER 1

THIS TIME WE WERE IN the Great Room enduring another etiquette lesson when bricks came
flying through the window. Elise immediately hit the ground and started crawling for the side
door, whimpering as she went. Celeste let out a high-pitched scream and bolted toward the
back of the room, barely escaping a shower of glass. Kriss grabbed my arm, pulling me, and I
broke into a run alongside her as we made our way to the exit.
    “Hurry, ladies!” Silvia cried.
    Within seconds, the guards had lined up at the windows and were firing, and the bursts of
sound echoed in my ears as we fled. Whether they came with guns or stones, anyone showing
the smallest level of aggression within sight of the palace would die. There was no more
patience left for these attacks.
    “I hate running in these shoes,” Kriss muttered, a heap of dress draped over her arm, eyes
focused on the end of the hall.
    “One of us is going to have to get used to it,” Celeste said, her breath labored.
    I rolled my eyes. “If it’s me, I’ll wear sneakers every day. I’m already over this.”
    “Less talking, more moving!” Silvia yelled.
    “How do we get downstairs from here?” Elise asked.
    “What about Maxon?” Kriss huffed.
    Silvia didn’t answer. We followed her through a maze of hallways, looking for a path to
the basement, watching as guard after guard ran in the opposite direction. I found myself
admiring them, wondering at the courage it took to run toward danger for the sake of other
people.
    The guards passing us were completely indistinguishable from one another until a set of
green eyes locked with mine. Aspen didn’t look afraid or even startled. There was a problem,
and he was on his way to fix it. That was simply who he was.
    Our gaze was brief, but it was enough. It was like that with Aspen. In a split second,
without a word, I could tell him Be careful and stay safe. And saying nothing, he’d answer I
know, just take care of yourself.
    While I could easily be at peace with the things we didn’t need to say, I had no such luck
with the things we’d said out loud. Our last conversation wasn’t exactly a happy one. I had
been about to leave the palace and had asked him to give me some space to get over the
Selection. And then I’d ended up staying and had given him no explanation as to why.
    Maybe his patience with me was falling short, his ability to see only the best in me
running dry. Somehow I would have to fix that. I couldn’t see a life for me that didn’t include
Aspen. Even now, as I hoped Maxon would choose me, a world without Aspen felt
unimaginable.
    “Here it is!” Silvia called, pushing a mysterious panel in a wall.
    We started down the stairs, Elise and Silvia heading the charge.
    “Damn it, Elise, pick up the pace!” Celeste yelled. I wanted to be irritated that she said it,
but I knew we were all thinking the same thing.
    As we descended into the darkness, I tried to reconcile myself to the hours that would be
wasted, hiding like mice. We continued on, the sound of our escape covering the shouts until
one man’s voice rang out right on top of us.
    “Stop!” he yelled.
    Kriss and I turned together, watching as the uniform became clear. “Wait,” she called to
the girls below. “It’s a guard.”
    We stood on the steps, breathing heavily. He finally reached us, gasping himself.
    “Sorry, ladies. The rebels ran as soon as the shots were fired. Weren’t in the mood for a
fight today, I guess.”
    Silvia, running her hands over her clothes to smooth them, spoke for us. “Has the king
deemed it safe? If not, you’re putting these girls in a very dangerous position.”
    “The head of the guard cleared it. I’m sure His Majesty—”
    “You don’t speak for the king. Come on, ladies, keep moving.”
    “Are you serious?” I asked. “We’re going down there for nothing.”
    She fixed me with a stare that might have stopped a rebel in his tracks, and I shut my
mouth. Silvia and I had built a friendship of sorts as she unknowingly helped me distract
myself from Maxon and Aspen with her extra lessons. After my little stunt on the Report a
few days ago, it seemed that had dissolved into nothing. Turning to the guard, she continued.
“Get an official order from the king, and we’ll return. Keep walking, ladies.”
    The guard and I shared an exasperated look and parted ways.
    Silvia showed absolutely no remorse when, twenty minutes later, a different guard came,
telling us we were free to go upstairs.
    I was so irritated by the whole situation, I didn’t wait for Silvia or the other girls. I climbed
the stairs, exiting somewhere on the first floor, and continued to my room with my shoes still
hooked on my fingers. My maids were missing, but a small silver platter holding an envelope
was waiting on the bed.
    I recognized May’s handwriting instantly and tore open the envelope, devouring her
words.

    Ames,
    We’re aunts! Astra is perfect. I wish you were here to meet her in person, but we all
understand you need to be at the palace right now. Do you think we’ll be together for
Christmas? Not that far away! I’ve got to get back to helping Kenna and James. I can’t
believe how pretty she is! Here’s a picture for you. We love you!
    May

   I slipped the glossy photo from behind the note. Everyone was there except for Kota and
me. James, Kenna’s husband, was beaming, standing over his wife and daughter with puffy
eyes. Kenna sat upright in the bed, holding a tiny pink bundle, looking equal parts thrilled
and exhausted. Mom and Dad were glowing with pride, while May’s and Gerad’s enthusiasm
jumped from the image. Of course Kota wouldn’t have gone; there was nothing for him to
gain from being present. But I should have been there.
   I wasn’t though.
   I was here. And sometimes I didn’t understand why. Maxon was still spending time with
Kriss, even after all he’d done to get me to stay. The rebels unrelentingly attacked our safety
from the outside, and inside, the king’s icy words did just as much damage to my confidence.
All the while, Aspen orbited me, a secret I had to keep. And the cameras came and went,
stealing pieces of our lives to entertain the people. I was being pushed into a corner from
every angle, and I was missing out on all the things that had always mattered to me.
    I choked back angry tears. I was so tired of crying.
    Instead I went into planning mode. The only way to set things right was to end the
Selection.
    Though I still occasionally questioned my desire to be the princess, there was no doubt in
my mind that I wanted to be Maxon’s. If that was going to happen, I couldn’t sit back and
wait for it. Remembering my last conversation with the king, I paced as I waited for my
maids.

I could hardly breathe, so I knew eating would be a waste. But it would be worth the sacrifice.
I needed to make some progress, and I needed to do it fast. According to the king, the other
girls were making advances toward Maxon—physical advances—and he’d said I was far too
plain to have a chance of matching them in that department.
    As if my relationship with Maxon wasn’t complicated enough, there was a whole new
issue of rebuilding trust. And I wasn’t sure if that meant I wasn’t supposed to ask questions
or not. While I felt pretty sure he hadn’t gone that far physically with the other girls, I
couldn’t help but wonder. I’d never tried to be seductive before—pretty much every intimate
moment I’d had with Maxon came about without intention—but I had to hope that if I was
deliberate, I could make it clear that I was just as interested in him as the others.
    I took a deep breath, raised my chin, and walked into the dining hall. I was purposely a
minute or two late, hoping everyone would already be seated. I was right on that count. But
the reaction was better than I’d hoped.
    I curtsied, swinging my leg around so the slit in the dress fell open, leading nearly all the
way up my thigh. The dress was a deep red, strapless and practically backless, and I was
almost positive my maids had used magic to make it stay up at all. I rose, locking eyes with
Maxon, who I noticed had stopped chewing. Someone dropped a fork.
    Lowering my gaze, I walked to my seat, settling in next to Kriss.
    “Seriously, America?” she whispered.
    I tilted my head in her direction. “I’m sorry?” I replied, feigning confusion.
    She put her silverware down, and we stared at each other. “You look trashy.”
    “Well, you look jealous.”
    I’d hit pretty close to the mark, because she flushed a bit before returning to her food. I
took limited bites of my own, already miserably constricted. As dessert was being set in front
of me, I chose to stop ignoring Maxon, and as I had hoped, his eyes were on me. He reached
up and grabbed his ear immediately, and I demurely did the same. My gaze flickered quickly
toward King Clarkson, and I tried not to smile. He was irritated, another trick I’d managed to
get away with.
    I excused myself first, giving Maxon a chance to admire the back of the dress, and scurried
to my room. I closed the door to my room behind me and unzipped the gown immediately,
desperate for a breath.
    “How’d it go?” Mary asked, rushing over.
    “He seemed stunned. They all did.”
    Lucy squealed, and Anne came to help Mary. “We’ll hold it up. Just walk,” she ordered. I
did as I was told. “Is he coming tonight?”
    “Yes. I’m not sure when, but he’ll definitely be here.” I perched on the edge of my bed,
arms folded around my stomach to keep the open dress from falling down.
    Anne gave me a sad face. “I’m sorry you’ll have to be uncomfortable for a few more hours.
I’m sure it’ll be worth it though.”
    I smiled, trying to look like I was fine dealing with the pain. I’d told my maids I wanted to
get Maxon’s attention. I’d left out my hope that, with any luck, this dress would be on the
floor pretty soon.
    “Do you want us to stay until he arrives?” Lucy asked, her enthusiasm bubbling over.
    “No, just help me zip this thing back up. I need to think some things through,” I answered,
standing so they could help me.
    Mary took hold of the zipper. “Suck it in, miss.” I obeyed, and as the dress cinched me in
again, I thought of a soldier going to war. Different armor but the same idea.
    Tonight I was taking down a man.
CHAPTER 2

I OPENED THE BALCONY DOORS, letting the air sweeten my room. Even though it was December,
the breeze was light and tickled my skin. We weren’t allowed to go outside at all anymore, not
without guards by our sides, so this would have to do.
    I scurried around the room, lighting candles, trying to make the space inviting. The knock
came at the door, and I blew out the match, bolted over to the bed, picked up a book, and
fanned out my dress. Why yes, Maxon, this is how I always look when I read.
    “Come in,” I offered, barely loud enough to be heard.
    Maxon entered, and I lifted my head delicately, catching the wonder in his eyes as he
surveyed my dimly lit room. Finally he focused on me, his gaze traveling up my exposed leg.
    “There you are,” I said, closing the book and standing to greet him.
    He shut the door and came in, his eyes locked on my curves. “I wanted to tell you that you
look fantastic tonight.”
    I flicked my hair over my shoulder. “Oh, this thing? It was just sitting in the back of the
closet.”
    “I’m glad you pulled it out.”
    I laced my fingers through his. “Come sit with me. I haven’t seen you much lately.”
    He sighed and followed. “I’m sorry about that. Things have been a bit tense since we lost
so many people in that rebel attack, and you know how my father is. We sent several guards
to protect your families, and our forces are stretched thin, so he’s worse than usual. And he’s
pressuring me to end the Selection, but I’m holding my ground. I want to have some time to
think this through.”
    We sat on the edge of the bed, and I settled close to him. “Of course. You should be in
charge of this.”
    He nodded. “Exactly. I know I’ve said it a thousand times, but when people push me, it
makes me crazy.”
    I gave him a little pout. “I know.”
    He paused, and I couldn’t read his face. I was trying to figure out how to move this
forward without being pushy, but I wasn’t sure how to manufacture a romantic moment.
    “I know this is silly, but my maids put this new perfume on me today. Is it too strong?” I
asked, tilting my neck so he could lean in and breathe.
    He came near, his nose hitting a soft patch of skin. “No, dear, it’s lovely,” he said into the
curve that led to my shoulder. Then he kissed me there. I swallowed, trying to focus. I needed
to have some level of control.
    “I’m glad you like it. I’ve really missed you.”
    I felt his hand snake around my back, and I brought my face down. There he was, eyes
looking into mine, our lips millimeters apart.
    “How much have you missed me?” he breathed.
    His stare, combined with his voice being so low, was doing funny things to my heartbeat.
“So much,” I whispered back. “So, so much.”
    I leaned forward, aching to be kissed. Maxon was confident, pulling me closer with one
hand and stringing the other through my hair. My body wanted to melt into the kiss, but the
dress stopped me. Then, suddenly nervous again, I remembered my plan.
    Sliding my hands down Maxon’s arms, I guided his fingers to the zipper on the back of my
dress, hoping that would be enough.
    His hands lingered there for a moment, and I was seconds away from just asking him to
unzip it when he burst out laughing.
    The sound sobered me up pretty quickly.
    “What’s so funny?” I asked, horrified, trying to think of an inconspicuous way to check my
breath.
    “Of everything you’ve done, this is by far the most entertaining!” Maxon bent over, hitting
his knee as he laughed.
    “Excuse me?”
    He kissed me hard on my forehead. “I always wondered what it would be like to see you
try.” He started laughing again. “I’m sorry; I have to go.” Even the way he stood held a sense
of amusement. “I’ll see you in the morning.”
    And then he left. He just left!
    I sat there, completely mortified. Why in the world did I think I could pull that off?
Maxon may not know everything about me, but at the very least he knew my character—and
this? It wasn’t me.
    I looked down at the ridiculous dress. It was way too much. Even Celeste wouldn’t have
gone this far. My hair was too perfect, my makeup too heavy. He knew what I was trying to do
from the second he walked through the doorway. Sighing, I went around the room, blowing
out candles and wondering how I was supposed to face him tomorrow.
CHAPTER 3

I DEBATED CLAIMING THE STOMACH flu. Or an incapacitating headache. Panic attack. Really,
anything to get out of going to breakfast.
     Then I thought of Maxon and how he always talked about putting on a brave face. That
wasn’t a particular strength of mine. But if I went downstairs at least, if I could just be
present, maybe he’d give me some credit.
     In hopes that I could erase some of what I’d done, I asked my maids to put me in the most
demure dress I had. Based on that request alone, they knew not to ask about the night before.
The neckline was a bit higher than the ones we typically wore in the warm Angeles weather,
and it had sleeves that went nearly to my elbows. It was flowery and cheerful, the opposite of
last night’s getup.
     I could barely look at Maxon when I entered the dining hall, but I walked tall at least.
     When I finally peeked at him, he was watching me, grinning. As he chewed his food, he
winked at me; and I ducked my head again, pretending to be very interested in my quiche.
     “Glad to see you in actual clothes today,” Kriss spat.
     “Glad to see you in such a good mood.”
     “What in the world has gotten into you?” she hissed.
     Dejected, I gave up. “I’m not up for this today, Kriss. Just leave me alone.”
     For a moment, she looked as if she might fight back, but I guessed I wasn’t worth it. She
sat up a little straighter and continued eating. If I’d had any level of success last night, then I
could justify my actions; as it was, I couldn’t even fake being proud.
     I risked another glance at Maxon, and even though he wasn’t watching me, he was still
suppressing a smug expression as he cut his food. That was it. I wasn’t going to suffer
through a day like this. I was about to swoon or clutch my stomach or do anything to get me
out of the room when a butler came in. He carried an envelope on a silver platter, and he
bowed before placing it in front of King Clarkson.
     The king took the letter and read it quickly. “Damn French,” he muttered. “Sorry, Amberly,
it looks like I’ll be leaving within the hour.”
     “Another problem with the trade agreement?” she asked quietly.
     “Yes. I thought we’d settled all this months ago. We need to be firm on this one.” He
stood, throwing his napkin on his plate, and made his way to the door.
     “Father,” Maxon called, standing. “Don’t you want me to come?”
     It had struck me as odd that the king didn’t bark out a command for his son to follow
when he exited, seeing as that was his usual method of instructing. Instead he turned to
Maxon, his eyes cold and his voice sharp.
     “When you’re ready to behave the way a king should, you’ll get to experience what a king
does.” Without saying anything more, he left us.
     Maxon stood for a moment, shocked and embarrassed by his father’s choice to call him
out in front of everyone. As he sat down, he turned to his mother. “Wasn’t really looking
forward to that flight, if I’m being honest,” he said, joking away the tension. The queen
smiled, as of course she must, and the rest of us ignored it.
     The other girls finished their breakfasts and excused themselves to the Women’s Room.
When it was just Maxon, Elise, and me remaining at our tables, I looked up at him. We both
tugged our ears at the same time, then smiled. Elise finally left, and we met in the middle of
the room, not bothered by the maids and butlers cleaning up around us.
    “It’s my fault he’s not taking you,” I lamented.
    “Perhaps,” he teased. “Trust me, this isn’t the first time he’s tried to put me in my place,
and he has a million reasons in his head why he thinks he should. It wouldn’t surprise me if
his only motive this time was spite. He doesn’t want to lose control, and the closer I am to
picking a wife, the more of a likelihood that is for him. Though we both know he’ll never truly
let go.”
    “You might as well just send me home. He’s never going to let you pick me.” I still hadn’t
told Maxon about how his father had cornered me, threatening me in the middle of the hall
after Maxon talked him into letting me stay. King Clarkson had made it clear I was to keep
my mouth shut about our conversation, and I didn’t want to cross him. At the same time, I
hated keeping it from Maxon.
    “Besides,” I added, crossing my arms, “after last night, I can’t imagine you’re that keen on
keeping me anyway.”
    He bit his lips. “I’m sorry I laughed, but really, what else could I do?”
    “I had plenty of ideas,” I muttered, still embarrassed at my attempt to seduce him. “I feel
so stupid.” I buried my head in my hands.
    “Stop,” he said gently, pulling me in for an embrace. “Trust me when I say, it was very
tempting. But you’re not that girl.”
    “But shouldn’t I be? Shouldn’t that be part of what we are?” I whined into his chest.
    “Don’t you remember the night in the safe room?” he said, his voice low.
    “Yes, but that was basically us saying good-bye.”
    “It would have been a fantastic good-bye.”
    I stepped away and swatted at him. He laughed, happy to have broken through the
uneasiness.
    “Let’s forget about it,” I proposed.
    “Very well,” he agreed. “Besides, we have a project to work on, you and I.”
    “We do?”
    “Yes, and since my father is gone, this will be a convenient time to start brainstorming.”
    “All right,” I said, excited to be a part of something that was just between the two of us.
    He sighed, making me nervous about what he was planning. “You’re right. Father doesn’t
approve of you. But he might be forced to bend if we can manage one thing.”
    “Which is?”
    “We have to make you the people’s favorite.”
    I rolled my eyes. “That is what we’re working on? Maxon, that’s never going to happen. I
saw a poll in one of Celeste’s magazines after I tried to save Marlee. People can hardly stand
me.”
    “Opinions change. Don’t let that one moment bring you down too much.”
    I still felt hopeless, but what could I say? If this was my only option, I had to at least try.
    “Fine,” I said. “But I’m telling you, this won’t work.”
    With an impish grin on his face, he came very close and gave me a long, slow kiss. “And
I’m telling you it will.”
CHAPTER 4

I WALKED INTO THE WOMEN’S Room, thoughts focused on Maxon’s new plan. The queen hadn’t
shown up yet, and the girls were all laughing in a clump by the windows.
    “America, come here!” Kriss said urgently. Even Celeste turned back smiling, waving me
over.
    I was a little uneasy about what could be waiting for me, but I walked to the huddle
anyway.
    “Oh, my goodness!” I squealed.
    “I know,” Celeste sighed.
    There, running laps in the garden without their shirts on, were half of the guards in the
palace. Aspen had told me that all guards got injections to help keep them strong, but
apparently they also did a lot of work to keep their bodies in peak condition.
    While we were all devoted to Maxon, the sight of cute boys was something we couldn’t
ignore.
    “The guy with blond hair,” Kriss said. “Well, I think he’s a blond. Their hair is so short!”
    “I like this one,” Elise said quietly as another guard ran past our window.
    Kriss giggled. “I can’t believe we’re doing this!”
    “Oh, oh! That guy, right there with the green eyes,” Celeste said, pointing to Aspen.
    Kriss sighed. “I danced with him at Halloween, and he’s as funny as he is good-looking.”
    “I danced with him, too,” Celeste bragged. “Easily the most gorgeous guard in the palace.”
    I had to laugh a little. I wondered how she would feel if she knew he used to be a Six.
    I watched him run and thought about the hundreds of times those arms had embraced
me. The distance growing between Aspen and me felt unavoidable, but even now I had to
wonder if there was a way to keep some piece of what we had. What if I needed him?
    “What about you, America?” Kriss asked.
    The only one who really caught my eye was Aspen, and after feeling that ache for him, this
felt kind of stupid. I dodged the question.
    “I don’t know. They’re all kind of nice.”
    “Kind of nice?” Celeste echoed. “You have to be kidding! These are some of the best-
looking guys I’ve ever seen.”
    “It’s only a bunch of boys without their shirts on,” I countered.
    “Yeah, why don’t you enjoy it for a minute before it’s just the three of us you have to look
at,” she said snippily.
    “Whatever. Maxon looks just as good without his shirt on as any of those guys.”
    “What?” Kriss shrieked.
    A second after the words slipped out of my mouth, I realized what I’d said. Three sets of
eyes focused in on me.
    “When were you and Maxon topless, exactly?” Celeste demanded.
    “I wasn’t!”
    “But he was?” Kriss asked. “Was that what that god-awful dress was about yesterday?”
    Celeste gasped. “You slut!”
    “Excuse me!” I yelled.
    “Well, what else would you expect?” she snapped, crossing her arms. “Unless you want to
tell us all what happened and why we’re so wrong.”
    But there was no way to explain this. Undressing Maxon hadn’t exactly been a romantic
moment, but I couldn’t tell them I’d been tending to wounds on his back specifically
delivered by his father. He’d spent his life guarding that secret. If I betrayed him now, it
would be the end of us.
    “Celeste was half-naked up against him in a hallway!” I accused, pointing a finger at her.
    Her mouth popped open. “How did you know?”
    “Has everyone been getting naked with Maxon?” Elise asked, horrified.
    “We weren’t naked!” I shouted.
    “Okay,” Kriss said, putting out her arms. “We need to clear this up. Who has done what
with Maxon?”
    Everyone was quiet for a moment, not wanting to speak up first.
    “I’ve kissed him,” Elise said. “Three times, but that’s it.”
    “I haven’t kissed him at all,” Kriss confessed. “But that’s by my own choosing. He would
kiss me if I’d let him.”
    “Really? Not once?” Celeste asked, shocked.
    “Not once.”
    “Well, I’ve kissed him plenty.” Celeste flipped her hair, deciding to be proud instead of
embarrassed. “The best was in the hallway one night.” She eyed me. “We kept whispering
about how exciting it was that we might get caught.”
    Finally all eyes were on me. I thought of the king’s words, suggesting that maybe the
other girls were being much more promiscuous than I was prepared to be. But now I knew it
was one more weapon in his arsenal, a way to make me feel insignificant. I came clean.
    “I was Maxon’s first kiss, not Olivia. I didn’t want anyone to know. And we’ve had a few . .
. more intimate moments, and one of those times Maxon’s shirt came off.”
    “Came off? Like it magically flew over his head?” Celeste pressed.
    “He took it off,” I admitted.
    Not satisfied, Celeste pushed on. “He took it off or you took it off?”
    “I guess we both did.”
    After a charged moment, Kriss started again. “Okay, so now we all know where we stand.”
    “And where is that?” Elise asked.
    No one answered.
    “I just want to say . . . ,” I started. “All of those moments were really important to me, and
I care about Maxon.”
    “Are you implying that we don’t?” Celeste barked.
    “I know that you don’t.”
    “How dare you?”
    “Celeste, it’s no secret that you want someone with power. I’m willing to bet you like
Maxon well enough, but you’re not in love with him. You’re shooting for the crown.”
    Without denying it, she turned on Elise. “What about this one? I’ve never seen a speck of
emotion out of you!”
    “I’m reserved. You should try it sometime,” Elise fired back quickly. Seeing a spark of
anger in Elise made me like her more. “In my family, all the marriages are arranged. I knew
what was coming for me, and that’s all this is. I may not be head over heels for Maxon, but I
respect him. Love can come later.”
    Sympathetically, Kriss spoke. “That actually sounds kind of sad, Elise.”
    “It’s not. There are bigger things than love.”
    We stared at Elise, her words echoing. I fought for my family out of love, and for Aspen,
too. And now, though it scared me to think it, I was sure that all my actions where Maxon was
concerned—even when they were hopelessly stupid—were driven by that feeling. Still, what if
there was something more important here than that?
    “Well, I’ll say it: I love him,” Kriss blurted. “I love him, and I want him to marry me.”
    Snapped back into the discussion at hand, I ached to melt into the carpet. What had I
started?
    “All right, America, fess up,” Celeste demanded.
    I froze, breathing shallowly. It took me a moment to find the right words.
    “Maxon knows how I feel, and that’s all that matters.”
    She rolled her eyes at my answer but didn’t press any further. No doubt she was worried I
would do the same to her if she did.
    We stood there, looking at one another. The Selection had been going on for months, and
now we could finally see the real lines of competition. We’d all gotten a peek into everyone
else’s relationship with Maxon—at least one aspect of it—and could look at them side by side.
    Moments later the queen walked in, wishing us a good morning. After curtsying to her, we
all retreated. Into corners, into ourselves. Maybe it was always supposed to come to this.
There were four girls and one prince, and three of us would be leaving soon with little more
than an interesting story of how we spent our fall.
CHAPTER 5

I WAS WRINGING MY HANDS as I paced the downstairs library, trying to put the words together in
my head. I knew I needed to explain what had just happened to Maxon before he heard about
it from the other girls, but that didn’t mean I was looking forward to the conversation.
     “Knock, knock,” he said, coming in. He took in my worried expression. “What’s wrong?”
     “Don’t get mad,” I warned as he approached.
     His pace slowed, and the concerned look on his face became guarded instead. “I’ll try.”
     “The girls know I saw you without your shirt on.” I saw the question coming to his lips. “I
didn’t say anything about your back,” I vowed. “I wanted to, because now they just think we
were in the middle of some big make-out fest.”
     He smiled. “It did end up that way.”
     “Don’t joke, Maxon! They hate me right now.”
     The light didn’t leave his eyes as he hugged me. “If it’s any consolation, I’m not mad. So
long as you kept my secret, I don’t mind. Though I am a little shocked you told them. How
did it even come up?”
     I buried my head in his chest. “I don’t think I can tell you.”
     “Hmm.” His thumb rubbed up and down my back. “I thought we were supposed to be
working on our trust.”
     “We are. I’m asking you to trust that this will only get worse if I tell you.” Maybe I was
wrong, but I was pretty sure confessing to Maxon that we were checking out half-dressed,
sweaty guards would get us all into some kind of trouble.
     “Okay,” he finally said. “The girls know you’ve seen me partly undressed. Anything else?”
     I hesitated. “They know I was your first kiss. And I know everything you have and haven’t
done with them.”
     He pulled back. “What?”
     “After I let the whole shirtless thing slip, there was a lot of finger-pointing, and everyone
came clean. I know you’ve spent plenty of time kissing Celeste and that you would have
kissed Kriss long before now if she would have let you. It all came out.”
     He wiped his hand over his face, taking a few paces as he processed this. “So I have
absolutely no privacy anymore? None? Because the four of you had to check scores with each
other?” His frustration was clear.
     “You know, for someone concerned with honesty, you ought to be grateful.”
     He stopped and stared. “I beg your pardon?”
     “Everything is out in the open now. We all have a pretty good idea of where we stand, and
I, for one, am thankful.”
     He rolled his eyes. “Thankful?”
     “If you had told me that Celeste and I were at about the same point with you physically, I
would never have tried to come on to you like I did last night. Do you know how humiliated I
was?”
     He scoffed and started pacing again. “Please, America, you’ve said and done so many
foolish things, I’m surprised you can even be embarrassed anymore.”
     Maybe it was because I had been raised with less of an articulate education, but it took a
second for the full impact of his words to hit me. Maxon had always liked me, or so he’d said.
I knew it was against the better judgment of other people. Was it also against his?
    “I’ll go then,” I said quietly, unable to look him in the eye. “Sorry I let the whole shirt
thing out.” I started walking away, feeling so small I wondered if he even noticed.
    “Come on, America. I didn’t mean it like—”
    “No, it’s fine,” I mumbled. “I’ll watch my words better.”
    I made my way upstairs, unsure of whether I wanted Maxon to come after me or not. He
didn’t.
    When I got to my room, Anne, Mary, and Lucy were in there, changing my sheets and
dusting the shelves.
    “Hello, my lady,” Anne greeted. “Would you like some tea?”
    “No, I’m just going to sit on the balcony for a moment. If any visitors come, tell them I’m
resting.”
    Anne frowned a bit but nodded. “Of course.”
    I spent some time taking in the fresh air, then went over the assigned reading Silvia had
prepared for us. I took a short nap and played my violin for a little while. So long as I could
avoid the other girls and Maxon, I really didn’t care what I was doing.
    With the king away, we were allowed to take our meals in our rooms, so I did. Halfway
through my lemon-and-pepper chicken, a knock came at the door. Maybe I was being
paranoid, but I was sure it was Maxon. There was no way I could see him right now. I grabbed
Mary and Anne and headed to the bathroom.
    “Lucy,” I whispered. “Tell him I’m taking a bath.”
    “Him? A bath?”
    “Yes. Don’t let him in,” I instructed.
    “What’s this all about?” Anne asked as I closed the door, pressing my ear up against it.
    “Can you hear anything?” I asked.
    They both put their ears to the door, too, waiting to see if something intelligible came
through.
    I heard Lucy’s muffled voice, but then I put my ear to the crack of the door and the
following conversation was much clearer.
    “She’s in the bath, Your Majesty,” Lucy answered calmly. It was Maxon.
    “Oh. I was hoping she’d be eating still. I thought maybe I could have my dinner with her.”
    “She decided to take a bath before she ate.” There was a tiny waver in her voice,
uncomfortable with being dishonest.
    Come on, Lucy. Hold it together.
    “I see. Well, maybe you could have her send for me when she’s done. I’d like to speak with
her.”
    “Umm . . . it might be a very long bath, Your Majesty.”
    Maxon paused. “Oh. Very well. Then could you please let her know I came by and tell her
to send for me if she’d like to talk. Tell her not to worry about the hour; I’ll come.”
    “Yes, sir.”
    It was quiet for a long time, and I was starting to think he had left.
    “Um, thank you,” he said finally. “Good night.”
    “Good night, Your Majesty.”
    I hid for a few seconds longer to make sure he was gone. When I came out, Lucy was still
standing by the door. I looked at all my maids, seeing the questions in their eyes.
   “I just want to be alone tonight,” I said vaguely. “In fact, I think I’m ready to wind down. If
you could take my dinner tray, I’m going to get ready for bed.”
   “Do you want one of us to stay?” Mary asked. “In case you decide to send for the prince?”
   I could see the hope in their eyes, but I had to let them down.
   “No, I just need some rest. I’ll see Maxon in the morning.”
   It was strange tucking myself into bed, knowing something was hanging between Maxon
and me, but I didn’t know how to talk to him right now. It didn’t make sense. We’d already
been through so many ups and downs together, so many attempts to make this relationship
real; but it was clear that if that was going to happen, we still had a very long way to go.

I was gruffly awoken before dawn. The light from the hallway flooded my room, and I rubbed
my eyes as a guard entered.
   “Lady America, wake up, please,” he said.
   “What’s wrong?” I asked, yawning.
   “There’s an emergency. We need you downstairs.”
   At once my blood turned cold. My family was dead; I knew it. We’d sent guards; we’d
warned those at home this was possible, but the rebels were too much. The same thing had
happened to Natalie. She left the Selection an only child after the rebels killed her little sister.
None of our families was safe anymore.
   I threw off the covers and grabbed my robe and slippers. I ran down the hall and stairs as
quickly as I could, nearly slipping twice on the steps.
   When I got to the first floor, Maxon was there, talking intently to a guard. I ran up to him,
forgetting about everything from the last two days.
   “Are they all right?” I asked, trying not to cry. “How bad is it?”
   “What?” he asked, taking me in for an unexpected hug.
   “My parents, my brothers and sisters. Are they okay?”
   Quickly Maxon held me at arm’s length and looked me in the eye. “They’re fine, America.
I’m sorry; I should have realized that’s what you would have thought of first.”
   I nearly started weeping I was so relieved.
   Maxon seemed a bit confused as he continued. “There are rebels in the palace.”
   “What?” I shrieked. “Why aren’t we hiding?”
   “They’re not here to attack.”
   “Then why are they here?”
   He sighed. “It’s only two rebels from the Northern camp. They’re unarmed, and they’re
specifically asking to speak to me . . . and to you.”
   “Why me?”
   “I’m not sure; but I’m going to talk to them, so I thought I would give you the chance to
speak to them as well.”
   I looked down at myself and ran my hand over my hair. “I’m in my nightgown.”
   He smiled. “I know, but this is very informal. It’s fine.”
   “Do you want me to talk to them?”
   “That is truly up to you, but I’m curious as to why they want to speak with you in
particular. I’m not sure they’ll tell me if you’re not there.”
   I nodded, weighing this in my head. I wasn’t sure I wanted to talk to rebels. Unarmed or
not, they were probably far deadlier than I could ever be. But if Maxon thought I could do it,
maybe I should. . . .
    “Okay,” I said, pulling myself up. “Okay.”
    “You won’t get hurt, America. I promise.” His hand was still on mine, and he gave my
fingers a tiny squeeze. He turned to the guard. “Lead the way. Keep your holster unlocked,
just in case.”
    “Of course, Your Majesty,” he answered, and escorted us around the corner into the Great
Room, where two people were standing, surrounded by more guards.
    It took me seconds to find Aspen in the crowd.
    “Could you call off your dogs?” one of the rebels asked. He was tall and slim and blond.
His boots were covered in mud, and his outfit looked like something a Seven might wear: a
pair of heavy pants taken in to fit him closely and a patched-up shirt beneath a beaten leather
jacket. A rusting compass on a long chain swung around his neck, moving as he shifted. He
looked rugged without being terrifying, which wasn’t what I’d expected.
    Even more unexpected was that his companion was a girl. She, too, wore boots; but as if
she was trying to be resourceful and fashionable at the same time, she had on leggings and a
skirt constructed from the same material as the male’s pants. Her hip jutted out confidently
to the side despite her being surrounded by guards. Even if I hadn’t recognized her face, I
would have remembered her jacket. Denim and cropped, covered with what looked like
dozens of embroidered flowers.
    Making sure I remembered who she was, she gave me a little curtsy. I made a sound that
was somewhere between a laugh and a gasp.
    “What’s wrong?” Maxon asked.
    “Later,” I whispered.
    Confused but calm, he gave me a comforting squeeze and focused again on our guests.
    “We’ve come to speak to you in peace,” the man said. “We are unarmed, and your guards
have searched us. I know asking for privacy would be inappropriate, but we have things to
discuss with you that no one else should hear.”
    “What about America?” Maxon asked.
    “We want to speak with her as well.”
    “To what end?”
    “Again,” the young man said, almost cockily, “we need to be out of earshot of these guys.”
He playfully gestured around the room.
    “If you think you can harm her—”
    “I know you’re skeptical of us, and for good reason, but we have no cause to hurt either of
you. We want to talk.”
    Maxon deliberated for a minute. “You,” he said, looking toward one of the guards, “pull
down one of the tables and four chairs. Then all of you, please stay back to give our guests
some room.”
    The guards obeyed, and we were all silent for a few uncomfortable minutes. When the
table was finally down from the stack and in the corner with two chairs on either side, Maxon
gestured that the pair should join us over there.
    As we walked, the guards stepped back, wordlessly forming a perimeter around the room
and focusing their eyes on the two rebels as if they were prepared to fire at a second’s notice.
    As we reached the table, the male stuck out his hand. “Don’t you think introductions are
in order?”
    Maxon eyed him warily but then relented. “Maxon Schreave, your sovereign.”
    The young man chuckled. “Honored, sir.”
    “And you are?”
    “Mr. August Illéa, at your service.”
CHAPTER 6

MAXON AND I LOOKED AT each other, then back to the rebels.
    “You heard me right. I’m an Illéa. And by birth, too. This one will be by marriage sooner or
later,” August said, nodding to the girl.
    “Georgia Whitaker,” she said. “And of course, we know all about you, America.”
    She gave me another smile, and I returned it. I wasn’t sure I trusted her, but I certainly
didn’t hate her.
    “So Father was right.” Maxon sighed. I looked over to him, confused. Maxon knew there
were direct descendants of Gregory Illéa walking around? “He said you’d come for the crown
one day.”
    “I don’t want your crown,” August assured us.
    “Good, because I intend to lead this country,” Maxon shot back. “I’ve been raised for it,
and if you think you can come in here claiming to be Gregory’s great-great-grandson—”
    “I don’t want your crown, Maxon! Destroying the monarchy is more up the Southern
rebels’ alley. We have other goals.” August sat at the table, leaning back in his seat. Then as if
it was his home we’d stepped into, he swept his arm across the chairs, inviting us to sit.
    Maxon and I eyed each other again and joined him, Georgia following quickly. August
looked at us awhile, either studying us or trying to decide where to start.
    Maxon, perhaps reminding us who was in charge, broke the tension. “Would you like
some tea or coffee?”
    Georgia lit up. “Coffee?”
    In spite of himself, Maxon smiled at her enthusiasm and turned behind him to get a
guard’s attention. “Could you have one of the maids bring some coffee, please? For goodness’
sake, make sure it’s strong.” Then he focused again on August.
    “I can’t begin to imagine what you want from me. It seems you made a point to come
while the palace was asleep, and I’m guessing you’d like to keep this visit as secretive as
possible. Say what you must. I can’t promise to give you what you want, but I will listen.”
    August nodded and leaned forward. “We’ve been looking for Gregory’s diaries for decades.
We knew they existed long ago and had a recent confirmation from a source I cannot reveal.”
August looked at me. “It wasn’t your presentation on the Report that gave it away, just so you
know.”
    I sighed in relief. The second he mentioned the diaries, I began silently cursing myself and
bracing for later when Maxon would add this to the list of stupid things I’d done.
    “We have never desired to take down the monarchy,” he said to Maxon. “Even though it
came about in a very corrupt way, we have no problem with having a sovereign leader,
particularly if that leader is you.”
    Maxon was still, but I could sense his pride. “Thank you.”
    “What we would like are other things, specific freedoms. We want nominated officials,
and we want to end the castes.” August said all this as if it was easy. If he’d seen my
presentation get cut off on the Report, he ought to know better.
    “You act like I’m already the king,” Maxon answered in frustration. “Even if it was
possible, I can’t simply give you what you’re asking for.”
    “But you’re open to the idea?”
    Maxon raised his hands and dropped them to the table. “What I’m open to is irrelevant at
the moment. I am not king.”
    August sighed, looking over to Georgia. They seemed to communicate wordlessly, and I
was impressed at their easy intimacy. Here they were, in a very tense situation—one they’d
entered maybe suspecting they wouldn’t be able to get out of—and their feelings for each
other were so close to the surface.
    “Speaking of kings,” Maxon added, “why don’t you explain to America who you are. I’m
sure you’d do a better job than I would.”
    I knew this was a way for Maxon to stall, to think of a way to get control of this situation,
but I didn’t mind. I was dying to understand.
    August smiled humorlessly. “That is an interesting story,” he promised, the vibrancy in his
voice hinting at how exciting his tale would be. “As you know, Gregory had three children:
Katherine, Spencer, and Damon. Katherine was married off to a prince, Spencer died, and
Damon was the one who inherited the throne. Then when Damon’s son, Justin, died, his
cousin Porter Schreave became prince, marrying Justin’s young widow, who had won the
Selection barely three years earlier. And now the Schreaves are the royal family. No more
Illéas ought to exist. But we do.”
    “We?” Maxon asked, his tone calculated, like he was hoping for numbers.
    August only nodded. The click of heels announced that the maid was coming. Maxon put a
finger to his lips, like August would dare to say more with her in hearing distance. The maid
set down the tray and poured coffee for all of us. Georgia’s hands were on her cup
immediately, waiting for it to be filled. I didn’t really care for coffee—it was too bitter for my
tastes—but I knew it would help me wake up, so I braced myself to take a drink.
    Before I could even sip, Maxon slid the bowl of sugar in front of me. Like he knew.
    “You were saying?” Maxon prompted, taking his coffee black.
    “Spencer didn’t die,” August said flatly. “He knew what his father had done to take over
the country, he knew his older sister had basically been sold into marriage, and he knew the
same was expected of him. He couldn’t do it, so he ran.”
    “Where did he go?” I asked, speaking for the first time.
    “He hid with relatives and friends, eventually making a camp with some like-minded
people in the north. It’s colder up there, wetter, and so hard to navigate that no one tries. We
live there quietly most of the time.”
    Georgia nudged him, her face a little shocked.
    August came to his senses. “I suppose I’ve now given you directions to invade us yourself.
I want to remind you that we’ve never killed any of your officers or staff, and we avoid
injuring them at all costs. All we ever wanted was to put an end to the castes. To do that we
needed proof that Gregory was the man we’d always been told he was. We have that now, and
America hinted at it enough that we feel we could exploit that if we wanted to. We really don’t
though. Not if we don’t have to.”
    Maxon took a deep swig and set down his cup. “I’m honestly not sure what I’m supposed
to do with this information. You’re a direct descendant of Gregory Illéa, but you don’t want
the crown. You’ve come looking for things only the king could provide, but you asked for an
audience with me and one of the Elite. My father isn’t even here.”
    “We know,” August said. “This was deliberate timing.”
    Maxon huffed. “If you don’t want the crown and only want things I can’t give you, why are
you here?”
    August and Georgia looked at each other, perhaps preparing themselves for their biggest
request yet.
    “We came to ask you for these things because we know you’re a reasonable man. We’ve
watched you all your life, and we can see it in your eyes. I can see it now.”
    I tried to be inconspicuous as I studied Maxon’s reaction to these words.
    “You don’t like the castes either. You don’t like the way your father holds the country
under his thumb. You don’t want to fight wars you know are nothing more than a distraction.
More than anything, you want peace during your lifetime.
    “We’re guessing that once you’re king, things could really change. And we’ve been waiting
a long time for that. We’re prepared to wait longer. The Northern rebels are willing to give
you our word never to attack the palace again and to do our best to stop or slow the Southern
rebels. We see so much that you can’t from behind these walls. We would swear our
allegiance to you, without question, if you would be willing to give us a sign of your readiness
to work with us toward a future that would finally give the people of Illéa a chance to live
their own lives.”
    Maxon didn’t seem to know what to say, so I spoke up.
    “What do the Southern rebels want anyway? Just to kill us all?”
    August moved his head in a motion that was neither a shake nor a nod. “That’s part of it,
sure, but only so they’ll have no one to combat them. Too much of the population is
oppressed, and this growing cell has bought in to the idea that they could rule the country
themselves. America, you’re a Five; I know you’ve seen your share of people who hate the
monarchy.”
    Maxon discreetly moved his eyes my way. I gave a brief nod.
    “Of course you have. Because when you’re on the bottom, your only choice is to blame the
top. In this case, they’ve got good reason—after all, it was a One who sentenced them to their
lives with no real hope for bettering them. Those in charge of the Southern rebels have
convinced their disciples that the way to get back what they think is theirs is to take it from
the monarchy. But I’ve had people defect from the Southerner rebel leadership and end up
with me. I know for a fact that once the Southerners get control, they have no intention of
sharing the wealth. When in history has that ever happened?
    “Their plan is to obliterate what Illéa has, take over, make a bunch of promises, and leave
everyone in the same place they are now. For most people, I’m sure it’ll get worse. The Sixes
and Sevens won’t move up, except for a select few the rebels will manipulate for the sake of
the show. Twos and Threes will have everything stripped from them. It’ll make a bunch of
people feel vindicated, but it won’t fix anything.
    “If there are no pop stars churning out those mind-numbing songs, then there are no
musicians in the booths backing them up, no clerks running back and forth with tapes, no
shop owners selling the music. Taking out one person at the top destroys thousands at the
bottom.”
    August paused for a moment, looking consumed with worry. “It’ll be Gregory all over
again, only worse. The Southerners are prepared to be far more cutthroat than you could ever
be, and the chances of the country bouncing back are slim. It’ll be the same old oppression
under a brand-new name . . . and your people will suffer like never before.” He looked into
Maxon’s eyes. They seemed to have some understanding between them, something that
maybe came from being born to lead.
    “All we need is a sign, and we’ll do everything we can to help you change things, peacefully
and fairly. Your people deserve a chance.”
    Maxon looked at the table. I couldn’t imagine the debate in his head. “What kind of sign?”
he asked hesitantly. “Money?”
    “No,” August said, nearly laughing. “We have more funds than you might guess.”
    “How is that possible?”
    “Donations,” he replied simply.
    Maxon nodded, but I was surprised. Donations meant there were people—who knew how
many—supporting them. How big was the Northern rebel force when those supporters were
taken into account? How much of the country was asking for exactly what these two had
come here requesting?
    “If not money,” Maxon said finally, “what do you want?”
    August flicked his head toward me. “Pick her.”
    I buried my face in my hands, knowing how Maxon would take this.
    There was a long moment of silence before he lost his temper. “I will not have anyone else
telling me who I can and cannot marry! This is my life you’re playing games with!”
    I looked up in time to see August stand across the table. “And the palace has been playing
with other people’s lives for years. Grow up, Maxon. You’re the prince. You want your damn
crown, then keep it. But responsibilities come with that privilege.”
    Guards were cautiously walking our way, alerted by Maxon’s tone and August’s aggressive
stance. Certainly they could hear everything by now.
    Maxon stood to counter him. “You don’t get to choose my wife. End of story.”
    August, completely undeterred, stepped back and crossed his arms. “Fine! We have
another option if this one doesn’t work.”
    “Who?”
    August rolled his eyes. “As if I would tell you, given how calmly you reacted the first
time.”
    “Come off it.”
    “This one or that one doesn’t really matter. We just need to know you’ll have a partner
who’ll be on the same page for this plan.”
    “My name is America,” I said fiercely, standing and looking him straight in the eye, “not
This One. I’m not some toy in your little revolution. You keep talking about everyone in Illéa
having a chance at the life they want. What about me? What about my future? Do I not count
in that plan?”
    I searched their faces, waiting for an answer. They were silent. I noticed the guards,
surrounding us, on edge.
    I lowered my voice. “I’m all for killing off the castes, but I’m not something to be played
with. If you’re looking for a pawn, there’s one girl upstairs so in love with him, she’d do
anything you asked if it meant a proposal at the end of the day. And the other two . . . between
duty and prestige, they’d be game, too. Go get one of them.”
    Without waiting to be excused, I turned to leave, storming away as best I could in a robe
and slippers.
    “America! Wait!” Georgia called. I got out the door before she caught up with me. “Stop
for a minute.”
    “What?”
    “We’re sorry. We thought you two were in love. We didn’t realize we were asking for
something he’d be opposed to. We were sure he’d be on board.”
    “You don’t understand. He’s so tired of being bullied and bossed around. You have no idea
what he’s been through.” I felt the tears rising, and I blinked them away, focusing on the
designs on Georgia’s jacket.
    “I know more than you think,” she said. “Maybe not everything, but a lot. We’ve been
watching the Selection very closely, and it looks like you two get along so well. He seems so
happy around you. And then . . . we know about how you rescued your maids.”
    It took me a second to realize what that meant. Who was watching us on their behalf?
    “And we saw what you did for Marlee. We saw you fight. And then your presentation a few
days ago.” She stopped to laugh. “That took some guts. We could use a girl with guts.”
    I shook my head. “I wasn’t trying to be a hero. Most of the time, I don’t feel anything close
to brave.”
    “So? It doesn’t really matter how you feel about your character; it just matters what you
do with it. You, more than the others, act on what’s right before thinking about what it will
mean for yourself. Maxon has some great candidates up there, but they won’t get their hands
dirty to make things better. Not like you.”
    “A lot of that was selfish. Marlee was important to me, and so are my maids.”
    She stepped closer. “But didn’t those actions come with consequences?”
    “Yes.”
    “And you probably knew they would. But you acted for those who couldn’t speak up for
themselves. That’s special, America.”
    This was different praise from what I was used to. I could handle my dad telling me I was
a beautiful singer or Aspen saying I was the prettiest thing he’d ever seen . . . but this? It was
almost overwhelming.
    “Honestly, with some of the stuff you’ve done, I can’t believe the king let you stay. The
whole thing on the Report . . .” She let out a whistle.
    I laughed. “He was so angry.”
    “I was shocked you made it out alive!”
    “It was by the skin of my teeth, let me tell you. And most days I feel like I’m only seconds
away from being kicked out.”
    “But Maxon likes you, right? The way he guards you . . .”
    I shrugged. “There are days when I feel so sure and then others where I have no idea.
Today isn’t a good day. Neither was yesterday. Or the day before, if I’m honest.”
    She nodded. “Well, we’re pulling for you, all the same.”
    “Me and someone else,” I corrected.
    “True.”
    Again she gave no clue as to her other favorite.
    “What was the deal with that curtsy in the woods? Just messing with me?” I asked.
    She smiled. “I know it might not seem like it by the way we act sometimes, but we really
do care about the royal family. If we lose them, the Southern rebels will win. If they get true
control . . . well, you heard August.” She shook her head. “Anyway, I’d felt certain I was
looking at my future queen, so I figured the least you deserved was a curtsy.”
    Her reasoning was so silly, it made me laugh again. “I can’t tell you how nice it is to talk to
a girl I’m not competing with.”
    “Getting a bit old?” she asked with a sympathetic expression.
    “As it’s gotten smaller, it’s gotten worse. I mean, I knew it would, but . . . it feels like it’s
moving away from trying to be the girl that Maxon would pick to making sure the other girls
won’t be the one he picks. I don’t know if that makes sense.”
    She nodded. “It does. But, hey, this is what you signed up for.”
    I chuckled. “Actually, I didn’t. I was sort of . . . encouraged to put my name in. I didn’t
want to be a princess.”
    “Really?”
    “Really.”
    She smiled. “Not wanting the crown means you’re probably the best person to have it.”
    I stared at her, convinced by her wide eyes that she believed that without a doubt. I hoped
to ask more, but Maxon and August came out of the Great Room, looking surprisingly calm. A
single guard followed at a distance. August was looking at Georgia like it had hurt him to be
away from her even for a few minutes. Maybe that was the only reason she was here today.
    “Are you okay, America?” Maxon asked.
    “Yes.” My ability to look him in the eye had disappeared again.
    “You should go get ready for the day,” he commented. “The guards have been sworn to
secrecy, and I’d appreciate the same from you.”
    “Of course.”
    He seemed displeased with my coolness, but how else was I supposed to act right now?
    “Mr. Illéa, it was a pleasure. We’ll talk again soon.” Maxon held out his hand. August took
it easily.
    “If there’s anything you need, don’t hesitate to ask. We truly are on your side, Your
Majesty.”
    “Thank you.”
    “Georgia, let’s go. Some of these guards look a little too trigger-happy.”
    She chuckled. “See you around, America.”
    I nodded, sure I’d never see her again and sad because of it. She walked past Maxon and
slid her hand into August’s. With a guard in tow, they walked out the gaping doors of the
palace, leaving Maxon and me alone in the foyer.
    His eyes rose to mine. I mumbled something and pointed upstairs, moving as I did so. His
quick objection to choosing me only drove home the pain of his words yesterday in the
library. I thought after the safe room there was some kind of understanding between us. But
it seemed as if everything had gotten even more muddled than it had been when I was still
trying to decide how much I liked Maxon in the first place.
    I didn’t know what this meant for us. Or if there was still an us worth worrying about.
CHAPTER 7

FOR AS FAST AS I was at getting to my room, Aspen was faster. I shouldn’t have been surprised.
Aspen knew the palace so well, this was probably nothing to him now.
    “Hey,” I started, a little unsure of what to say.
    Quickly, he wrapped his arms around me, then pulled away. “That’s my girl.”
    I smiled. “Yeah?”
    “You put ’em in their place, Mer.” Risking his life, Aspen ran a thumb down my cheek.
“You do deserve to be happy. We all do.”
    “Thank you.”
    Smiling, he dropped his hand to move the bracelet Maxon had brought me from New Asia
and reached underneath to touch the one I’d made of a button he’d given me. His eyes looked
sad as he stared at our little memento.
    “We’ll talk soon. Really talk. There’s a lot we need to work out.”
    With that, Aspen moved down the hall. I sighed and put my head in my hands. Did he
assume my rejection meant that I was pushing Maxon away for good? Did he think I wanted
to rekindle things with him?
    Then again, hadn’t I just pushed Maxon away?
    Hadn’t I thought yesterday that Aspen needed to stay in my life?
    So then why did everything feel awful?

The mood in the Women’s Room was dark. Queen Amberly sat writing her letters, and from
time to time, I’d notice her peek up to take in the four of us. After yesterday, we were
avoiding doing anything that might require us to interact with one another. Celeste had a pile
of magazines and was stretched out on the couch. In a very wise move, Kriss had taken her
journal and settled in to write, once again positioning herself near the queen. Why hadn’t I
thought of that? Elise had gotten out a collection of drawing pencils and was working on
something by the window. I was in a wide chair near the door, reading a book.
    As it was, we didn’t even have to make eye contact.
    I tried to concentrate on the words in front of me, but mostly I wondered who the
Northern rebels wanted as princess if they couldn’t have me. Celeste was very popular, and it
would be easy to get people to follow her. I wondered if they were aware of how manipulative
she could be. If they knew things about me, maybe they did. Was there more to Celeste than
I’d guessed?
    Kriss was sweet, and according to that poll a while back, she was one of the people’s
favorites. Her family didn’t have much sway, but she was more of a princess than the rest of
us. She had that air about her. Maybe that was her big draw; she wasn’t perfect, but she was
so lovable. There were days when even I wanted to follow Kriss.
    The one I suspected the least was Elise. She’d admitted she didn’t love Maxon and that
she was here because of duty. I genuinely thought that when she spoke of duty she meant to
her family or to her New Asian roots, not to the Northern rebels. Besides that, she was so
stoic and calm. There was nothing close to rebellious about her.
    And that was why I was suddenly positive she was their favorite. She seemed to be trying
the least to compete and had openly admitted her coolness toward Maxon. Maybe she didn’t
have to try because, at the end of the day, she had a quiet army of supporters to put her under
the crown anyway.
     “That’s it,” the queen said suddenly. “All of you, come here.” She pushed her little table
away and stood as we all walked over nervously.
     “Something’s wrong. What is it?” she demanded.
     We looked at one another, none of us wanting to explain. Finally too-perfect Kriss piped
up.
     “Your Majesty, we’ve just suddenly realized how intense this competition is. We’re a bit
more aware of where we each stand with the prince, and it’s difficult to let it sink in and still
want to chat right now.”
     The queen nodded in understanding. “How often do you all think of Natalie?” she asked.
Natalie had been gone barely a week. I thought of her nearly every day. I also thought of
Marlee all the time, and some of the other girls would pop into my head at random as well.
     “Always,” Elise said quietly. “She was so lighthearted.”
     A smile came to her lips as she said this. I had always assumed that Natalie got on Elise’s
nerves since she was so reserved and Natalie was so spacey. But maybe it was one of those
opposites-attract kinds of friendships.
     “Sometimes she would laugh over the littlest thing,” Kriss added. “It was contagious.”
     “Exactly,” the queen said. “I’ve been where you are, and I know how difficult it is. You
second guess the things you do; you second guess everything he does. You wonder over every
conversation, trying to read into the breaths between sentences. It’s exhausting.”
     It was as though I could see a weight lifting from everyone. Someone got us.
     “But know this: as much tension as you feel with one another now, you will ache every
time one of you leaves. No one will ever understand this experience like the other girls who
have been through it, the Elite especially. You may fight, but that’s what sisters do. These
girls,” she said, pointing to each of us, “will be the ones you call nearly every day for the first
year, terrified of making a mistake and needing their support. When you have parties, these
are the names you’ll put at the top of your guest lists, just under the names of your family
members. Because that’s what you are now. You’ll never lose these relationships.”
     We looked at one another. If I was the princess and something was happening where I
needed a rational perspective, I’d call Elise first. If I was fighting with Maxon, Kriss would
remind me of every good thing about him. And Celeste . . . well, I wasn’t so sure, but if
anyone was ever going to tell me to toughen up about something, it would be her.
     “So take your time,” she advised. “Adjust to where you are. And let it go. You don’t choose
him; he chooses you. There’s no point in hating the others for that.”
     “Do you know who he wants the most?” Celeste asked. And for the first time, I heard
worry in her voice.
     “I don’t,” Queen Amberly confessed. “Sometimes I think I could guess, but I don’t pretend
to understand everything Maxon feels. I know who the king would choose, but that’s about
it.”
     “Who would you choose?” I asked, then cursed myself for being so blunt.
     She smiled kindly. “I honestly haven’t let myself think about it. It would break my heart to
start loving one of you like a daughter and then lose you. I couldn’t bear it.”
     I lowered my eyes, not sure if those words were meant to be a comfort or not.
    “I will say I’d be happy to have any of you in my family.” I looked up and watched as she
took the time to meet each set of eyes. “For now, there’s work to do.”
    We stood there silently, soaking in her wisdom. I’d never taken the time to look at the
competitors in the last Selection, to find their pictures or anything. I knew a handful of
names, mostly because older women would drop them into conversations when I sang at
parties. It was never that important to me; we already had a queen, and even as a girl, the
possibility of becoming a princess never crossed my mind. But now I wondered how many of
the women who showed up to visit the queen or came for Halloween were her former
competition, now her closest friends.
    Celeste walked away first, heading back to the comfort of the couch. It didn’t seem as if
Queen Amberly’s words meant much to her. For some reason that was the tipping point for
me. Everything from the last few days crashed back onto my heart, and I could feel it was
seconds away from cracking.
    I curtsied. “Excuse me, please,” I mumbled, before moving swiftly to the door. I didn’t
have a plan. Maybe I could go sit in the bathroom for a minute or tuck myself away in one of
the numerous parlors downstairs. Maybe I would just go to my room and cry my eyes out.
    Unfortunately, it looked like the universe was plotting against me. Just outside the
Women’s Room, Maxon was pacing back and forth, looking as if he was trying to solve a
riddle. Before I could hide somewhere, he saw me.
    Of everything I wanted to do right now, this was the last thing on my list.
    “I was debating asking you to come out,” he said.
    “What do you need?” I answered shortly.
    Maxon stood there, still working up the nerve to say something that was obviously driving
him crazy. “So there’s one girl who loves me beyond reason?”
    I crossed my arms. After the last few days, I should have seen his change of heart coming.
“Yes.”
    “Not two?”
    I looked up at him, almost irritated that he needed me to explain. Don’t you already know
how I feel? I wanted to scream. Don’t you remember the safe room?
    But, honestly, I needed some confirmation right now, too. What had happened to make
me so unsure so quickly?
    The king. His insinuations about what the other girls had done, his praise of their merits
made me feel small. And it was compounded by all my missteps with Maxon this week. The
only way we would have ever been brought together was because of the Selection; but it
seemed that as long as it went on, there was no way for anything to feel certain.
    “You told me you didn’t trust me,” I accused. “The other day you made a point of
humiliating me, and yesterday you basically said I was an embarrassment. And not a few
hours ago, the suggestion of marrying me sent you into a rage. Forgive me for not feeling so
secure in our relationship right now.”
    “You forget that I’ve never done this, America,” he said passionately, but without any
anger. “You have someone to compare me to. I don’t even know how to have a typical
relationship, and I only get one chance. You’ve had at least two. I’m going to make mistakes.”
    “I don’t mind mistakes,” I shot back. “I mind the uncertainty. Most of the time I can’t tell
what’s going on.”
    He was quiet for a moment, and I realized that we’d come to a very serious crossroad.
We’d implied so many things, but we couldn’t go on like this for much longer. Even if we
ended up together, these moments of insecurity would haunt us.
    “We keep doing this,” I breathed, exhausted with this game. “We get close and then
something happens and it falls apart, and you never seem to be able to make a decision. If
you want me as much as you’ve always claimed to, why isn’t this over?”
    Even though I’d accused him of not caring about me at all, his frustration melted into
sadness. “Because half the time I’ve been sure you loved someone else and the other half I’ve
doubted you could love me at all,” he answered, making me feel positively awful.
    “Like I haven’t had my own reasons to doubt? You treat Kriss like she’s heaven on earth,
and then I catch you with Celeste—”
    “I explained that.”
    “Yes, but it still hurt to see.”
    “Well, it hurts me to see how quickly you shut down. Where does that even come from?”
    “I don’t know, but maybe you should stop thinking about me for a while.”
    The silence was abrupt.
    “What does that mean?”
    I shrugged. “There are three other girls here. If you’re so worried about your one shot, you
might want to make sure you’re not wasting it on me.”
    I walked away, angry with Maxon for making me feel this way . . . and angry with myself
for making things so much worse.
CHAPTER 8

I WATCHED AS THE PALACE was transformed. Almost overnight, lush Christmas trees lined the
hallways of the first floor, garlands were strung down the stairways, and all the floral
arrangements were changed to include holly or mistletoe. The strange thing was, if I opened
my window, it still felt like the edge of summer outside. I wondered if the palace could
somehow manufacture snow. Maybe if I asked Maxon, he’d look into it.
    Then again, maybe not.
    Days passed. I tried not to be upset that Maxon was doing exactly what I’d asked, but as
the space between us grew icy, I regretted my pride. I wondered if this was always bound to
happen. Was I destined to say the wrong thing, make the wrong choice? Even if Maxon was
what I wanted, I was never going to get myself together long enough for it to be real.
    The whole thing just felt tired; it was the same problem I’d been facing since Aspen
walked through the doorway of the palace. And I ached from it, from feeling so torn, so
confused.
    I’d taken to walking around the palace during the afternoons. With the gardens off-limits,
the Women’s Room day after day was too confining.
    It was while I was walking that I felt the shift. As if some unseen trigger had set off
everyone in the palace. The guards stood a bit stiller, and the maids walked a bit faster. Even I
felt strange, like I wasn’t quite so welcome here as I was only moments ago. Before I knew
what it was I was feeling, the king rounded the corner, a small entourage behind him.
    Then it all made perfect sense. His absence made the palace warmer, and now that he was
home, we were all subject to his whims again. No wonder the Northern rebels were excited
about Maxon.
    I curtsied as the king approached. While he walked, he put up a hand, and the men behind
him paused as he came close, leaving us with a small bubble of space in which to speak.
    “Lady America. I see you’re still here,” he said, his smile and his words at odds with each
other.
    “Yes, Your Majesty.”
    “And how have you been in my absence?”
    I smiled. “Silent.”
    “That’s a good girl.” He started to walk away but then remembered something and came
back. “It was brought to my attention that of the girls left, you’re the only one still receiving
money for your participation. Elise gave hers up voluntarily almost immediately after the
payments were stopped for the Twos and Threes.”
    That didn’t surprise me. Elise was a Four, but her family owned high-end hotels. They
weren’t hurting for money the way the shopkeepers back in Carolina were.
    “I think that should end,” he announced, snapping me back into the moment.
    My face fell.
    “Unless, of course, you’re here for a payout and not because you love my son.” His eyes
burned into me, daring me to challenge his decision.
    “You’re right,” I said, hating the way the words felt in my mouth. “It’s only fair.”
    I could see he was disappointed not to get more of a fight. “I’ll see to it immediately.”
    He walked away, and I stood there, trying not to feel sorry for myself. Really, it was fair.
How did it look that I was the only one getting checks? It would all end eventually anyway.
Sighing, I headed toward my room. The least I could do was write home and warn them that
the money wouldn’t be coming anymore.
    I opened my door, and, for the first time, I was completely ignored by my maids. Anne,
Mary, and Lucy were in the back corner, hovering over a dress that they appeared to be
working on, bickering about their progress.
    “Lucy, you said you were going to finish this hem last night,” Anne said. “You left early to
do it.”
    “I know, I know. I got sidetracked. I can do it now.” Her eyes were pleading. Lucy was
already a bit sensitive, and I knew Anne’s rigid manner sometimes got to her.
    “You’ve been getting sidetracked an awful lot these last few days,” Anne commented.
    Mary held out her hands. “Calm down. Give me the dress before you mess it up.”
    “I’m sorry,” Lucy said. “Just let me take it now, and I’ll get it done.”
    “What’s going on with you?” Anne demanded. “You’ve been acting so funny.”
    Lucy looked up at her, eyes frozen. Whatever her secret was, she looked terrified to share
it.
    I cleared my throat.
    They whipped their heads in my direction, all curtsying in turn.
    “I don’t know what’s going on,” I said as I walked toward them, “but I highly doubt the
queen’s maids argue like that. Besides, we’re wasting time if there’s work to be done.”
    Anne, still angry, pointed her finger at Lucy. “But she—”
    I silenced her with a small gesture of my hand, a bit surprised that it worked so easily.
    “No arguing. Lucy, why don’t you take that down to the workroom to finish, and we can all
get some room to think.”
    Lucy happily scooped up the fabric, so grateful for the means to escape that she practically
ran from the room. Anne watched her go, a full pout on her face. Mary looked worried but
dutifully went to work without another word.
    It took all of two minutes for me to realize that the mood in my room was too dreary for
me to focus. I grabbed some paper and a pen and headed back downstairs. I wondered if I’d
done the right thing, sparing Lucy. Maybe they’d all be fine if I’d let them air out whatever
was happening. Perhaps my meddling would shake their resolve in helping me. I’d never
really bossed them around like that before.
    I paused outside the Women’s Room. That didn’t feel like the right place either. I moved
down the main hallway, finding a little nook with a bench. That seemed nice. I ran into the
library and picked up a book to lean on and went back to the nook, finding myself practically
hidden by the large plant beside the bench. The wide window looked into the garden, and, for
a minute, the palace didn’t seem so small. I watched birds fly outside the window and tried to
form the kindest way to tell my parents there wouldn’t be any more checks.
    “Maxon, can’t we go on a real date? Somewhere outside the palace?” I recognized Kriss’s
voice immediately. Hmm. The Women’s Room might not have been so full after all.
    I could hear the smile in his voice as he answered. “I wish we could, sweetheart, but even
if things were calm, that would be difficult.”
    “I want to see you somewhere where you’re not the prince,” she whined lovingly.
    “Ah, but I’m the prince everywhere.”
    “You know what I mean.”
    “I do. I’m sorry I can’t give that to you, really. I think it would be nice to see you
somewhere where you weren’t an Elite. But this is the life I live.”
    His voice grew a little sad.
    “Would you regret it?” he asked. “For the rest of your life, it would be like this. Beautiful
walls, but walls all the same. My mother scarcely leaves the palace more than once or twice a
year.” Through the thick leaves of the planted shrub, I watched as they passed me, completely
unaware. “And if you think the public is intrusive now, it would be much worse when you’re
the only girl they’re watching. I know your feelings for me run deep. I feel it every day. But
what about the life that comes along with me? Do you want that?”
    It seemed as if they’d stopped somewhere in the hallway, as Maxon’s voice wasn’t fading.
    “Maxon Schreave,” Kriss started, “you make it sound like it’s a sacrifice for me to be here.
Each day I’m thankful for being chosen. Sometimes I try to imagine what it would have been
like if we’d never met. . . . I’d rather lose you now than have gone a lifetime without this.”
    Her voice was getting thick. I didn’t think she was crying, but she was close.
    “I need you to know I’d want you without the beautiful clothes and the gorgeous rooms.
I’d want you without the crown, Maxon. I just want you.”
    Maxon was momentarily speechless, and I could imagine him holding her close or wiping
away the tears that might have come by now.
    “I can’t tell you what it means to me to hear that. I’ve been dying for someone to tell me
that I was what mattered,” he confessed quietly.
    “You are, Maxon.”
    There was another quiet moment between them.
    “Maxon?”
    “Yes?”
    “I . . . I don’t think I want to wait anymore.”
    Even though I knew I’d regret it, at those words I silently put down my paper and pen,
slipped off my shoes, and scurried to the end of the hall. I peeked around and saw the back of
Maxon’s head as Kriss’s hand slid just barely into the neck of his suit. Her hair fell to the side
as they kissed, and, for her first, it seemed like it was going really well. Better than Maxon’s,
that was for sure.
    I ducked back around the corner and heard her giggle a second later. Maxon let out a sigh
that was half triumph and half relief. I walked to my seat quickly, angling myself toward the
window again, just in case.
    “When can we do that again?” she asked quietly.
    “Hmm. How about in as much time as it takes to get from here to your room?”
    Kriss’s laugh faded as they moved down the hallway. I sat there for a minute, then I
picked up my pen and paper, finding the words easily now.

   Mom and Dad,
   There’s so much to do these days, I have to keep this short. In an effort to show my
devotion to Maxon and not to the luxuries of being in the Elite, I’ve given up receiving
payments for my participation. I realize this is short notice, but I’m sure with everything
we’ve been given by now, there’s not much more we could want for.
   I hope you won’t be too disappointed by this news. I miss you and hope we’ll get to see
each other again soon.
   I love you all.
   America
CHAPTER 9

THE REPORT WAS LACKING MATERIAL following what the public would see as a rather uneventful
week. After the brief updates from the king on his visit to France, the floor was turned over to
Gavril, who was now interviewing the remaining Elite in a casual manner about things that
didn’t seem to matter at this point in the competition.
    Then again, the last time they’d asked us about something that did matter, I suggested
dissolving the castes and nearly got thrown out of the competition.
    “Lady Celeste, have you seen the princess’s suite?” Gavril asked jovially.
    I grinned to myself, grateful he didn’t ask me the same question. Celeste’s perfect smile
managed to widen, and she flipped her hair over her shoulder playfully before answering.
    “Well, Gavril, not yet. But I’m certainly hoping to earn the privilege. Of course, King
Clarkson has provided us with the most beautiful accommodations, I can’t imagine anything
better than what we already have. The, um . . . the beds are so . . .”
    Celeste stammered just a bit as her eyes caught two guards rushing into the studio. Our
seats were arranged in such a way that I could see them as they ran to the king, but Kriss and
Elise had their backs to the action. They both tried to turn their heads discreetly, but it did
them no good.
    “Luxurious. And it would be more than I could dream of to . . .” Celeste continued, not
totally focused on her answer.
    But it appeared she didn’t need to be. The king stood and came over, cutting her off.
    “Ladies and gentlemen, I apologize for the interruption, but this is very urgent.” He
clutched a piece of paper in one hand as he smoothed his tie with the other. He was
composed as he spoke. “Since our country’s birth, the rebel forces have been the bane of our
society. Over the years, their means of attacking the palace, not to mention the common man,
have become far more aggressive.
    “It appears they have sunk to new lows. As you may well know, the four remaining young
ladies of the Selection represent a wide range of castes. We have a Two, a Three, a Four, and a
Five. We’re honored to have such a varied group, but this has given a strange incentive to the
rebels.”
    The king looked over his shoulder at us before continuing. “We are prepared for attacks
on the palace, and when the rebels attack the public, we intercede as best we can. And I would
not worry you if I thought that I, as your king, could protect you, but . . .
    “The rebels are attacking by caste.”
    The words hung in the air. In an almost friendly gesture, Celeste and I shared a confused
glance.
    “They have wanted to end the monarchy for a long time. Recent attacks on the families of
these young girls have shown the lengths that they’re prepared to go to, and we’ve sent
guards from the palace to protect the Elite’s loved ones. But now that is not enough. If you
are a Two, Three, Four, or Five—that is, in the same caste as any of these ladies—you may be
subject to an attack from the rebels based on that fact alone.”
    I covered my mouth and heard Celeste suck in a breath.
    “Beginning today, the rebels intend to attack Twos and work their way down the castes,”
the king added solemnly.
    It was sinister. If they couldn’t get us to abandon the Selection for our families, they
would get a very large portion of the country to want us out. The longer we held on, the more
the people would hate us for risking their lives.
    “That is sad news, indeed, my king,” Gavril said, breaking the silence.
    The king nodded. “We will seek a solution, of course. But we have reports of eight attacks
today in five different provinces, all of them against Twos and all of them resulting in at least
one death.”
    The hand that had been frozen over my mouth dropped to my heart. People had died today
at our expense.
    “For now,” King Clarkson continued, “we encourage you to stay close to home and to take
any security measures possible.”
    “Excellent advice, my king,” Gavril said. He turned to us. “Ladies, anything you’d like to
add?”
    Elise merely shook her head.
    Kriss took a deep breath. “I know that Twos and Threes are being targeted, but your
homes are safer than most of the ones for lower castes. If you can take in a family of Fours or
Fives that you know well, I think that would be a good idea.”
    Celeste nodded. “Stay safe. Do what the king says.”
    She turned to me, and I realized I needed to say something. When I was on the Report and
feeling a bit lost, I tended to look to Maxon, as if he could silently give me advice. Falling into
that habit, I searched for his eyes. But all I saw was his blond hair as he stared into his lap,
his dejected frown the only thing visible.
    Of course he was worried about his people. But this was about more than protecting his
citizens. He knew we might leave.
    And shouldn’t we? How many Fives could lose their lives because I sat on my stool in the
bright lights of the palace studio?
    But how could I—or any of the girls—shoulder that burden? We weren’t the ones taking
their lives. I remembered everything August and Georgia said to us, and I knew there was
only one thing we could do.
    “Fight,” I said to no one in particular. Then remembering where I was, I turned to the
camera. “Fight. The rebels are bullies. They’re trying to scare you into doing what they want.
And what if you do? What kind of future do you think they’ll offer you? These people, these
tyrants, aren’t going to suddenly stop being violent. If you give them power, they’re going to
be a thousand times worse. So fight. However you can, fight.”
    I felt blood and adrenaline pulsing through me, like I was ready to attack the rebels
myself. I’d had enough. They’d kept us all in terror, victimized our families. If one of those
Southern rebels was in front of me right now, I wouldn’t run.
    Gavril started speaking again, but I was so angry, all I could hear was my heart beating in
my ears. Before I knew it, the cameras were off and the lights were powering down.
    Maxon went over to his father and whispered something to which the king shook his
head.
    The girls stood and started to leave.
    “Go straight to your rooms,” Maxon said gently. “Dinner will be brought up, and I’ll be
visiting you all soon.”
    As I walked past them, the king put a single finger on my arm, and in that small gesture, I
knew he meant for me to stop.
    “That wasn’t very smart,” he said.
    I shrugged. “What we’re doing isn’t working. Keep this up and you won’t have anyone left
to rule over.”
    He flicked his hand, dismissing me, fed up with me again.

Maxon quietly knocked on my door, letting himself in. I was already in my nightgown,
reading in my bed. I’d begun to wonder if he was going to come at all.
    “It’s so late,” I whispered, though there was no one to disturb.
    “I know. I had to speak with all the others, and it’s been extremely taxing. Elise was very
shaken. She’s feeling particularly guilty. I wouldn’t be surprised if she left in the next day or
two.”
    Even though he’d expressed his lackluster feelings for Elise more than once, I could see
just how much this hurt him. I curled my legs to my chest so he could sit.
    “What about Kriss and Celeste?”
    “Kriss is almost too optimistic. She’s sure that people will be careful and protect
themselves. I don’t see how that’s possible if there’s no way to tell when or where the rebels
will attack next. They’re all over the country. But she’s hopeful. You know how she is.”
    “Yeah.”
    He sighed. “Celeste is fine. She’s concerned, of course; but as Kriss pointed out, the Twos
are most likely to be the safest during all this. And she’s always so determined.” He laughed
to himself, staring at the floor. “Mostly she seemed concerned that I would be upset with her
if she stayed. As if I could hold it against her for choosing this over going home.”
    I sighed. “It’s a good point. Do you want a wife who isn’t worried about her subjects being
threatened?”
    Maxon looked at me. “You’re worried. You’re just too smart to be worried the way
everyone else is.” He shook his head and smiled. “I can’t believe you told them to fight.”
    I shrugged. “It seems like we do a whole lot of cowering.”
    “You’re absolutely right. And I don’t know if that will scare the rebels off or make them
more determined, but there’s no doubt you changed the game.”
    I cocked my head. “I don’t think I’d call a group of people trying to kill the population at
random a game.”
    “No, no!” he said quickly. “I can’t think of a word bad enough to call that. I meant the
Selection.” I stared at him. “For better or worse, the public got a real glimpse into your
character tonight. They can see the girl who drags her maids to safety, who stands up to kings
if she thinks she’s right. I’ll bet everyone will look at you running after Marlee in an entirely
different light now. Before this, you were just the girl who yelled at me when we met.
Tonight, you became the girl who’s not afraid of the rebels. They’ll think of you differently
now.”
    I shook my head. “That’s not what I was trying to do.”
    “I know. For all the planning I was doing to get you to show the people who you are, it
turns out you just do it on an impulse. It’s so you.” There was a look of astonishment in his
eyes, as if he should have been expecting this all along. “Anyway, I think it was the right thing
to say. It’s about time we did more than hide.”
    I looked down at my bedspread, tracing the seams with my finger. I was glad he approved,
but the way he spoke—as if it was one more of my little quirks—felt too intimate at the
moment.
    “I’m tired of fighting with you, America,” he said quietly. I looked up and saw the sincerity
in Maxon’s eyes as he continued. “I like that we disagree—it’s one of my favorite things about
you, actually—but I don’t want to argue anymore. Sometimes I have a bit of my father’s
temper. I fight it, but it’s there. And you!” he said with a laugh. “When you’re upset, you’re a
force!”
    He shook his head, probably remembering a dozen things at the same time I did. A knee
to the groin, the whole thing with the castes, Celeste’s busted lip when she talked about
Marlee. I’d never thought of myself as temperamental, but apparently I was. He smiled, and I
did, too. It was kind of funny when I thought about all my actions piled up like that.
    “I’m looking at the others, and I’m being fair. It makes me nervous to feel some of the
things I do. But I want you to know, I’m still looking at you, too. I think you know by now I
can’t help it.” He shrugged, seeming so boyish at that moment.
    I wanted to say the right thing, to let him know that I still wanted him to look at me. But
nothing felt right, so I slid my hand into his. We sat there quietly, looking at our hands. He
toyed with my two bracelets, seeming very concerned with them, and spent a little while
rubbing the back of my hand with his thumb. It was nice to have a still moment, just the two
of us.
    “Why don’t we spend the day together tomorrow?” he asked.
    I smiled. “I’d like that.”
CHAPTER 10

“SO, LONG STORY SHORT: MORE GUARDS?”
    “Yeah, Dad. Lots more.” I laughed into the phone, though the situation was hardly a funny
one. But Dad had a way of making the toughest things light. “We’re all staying. For now
anyway. And even though they say they’re starting with Twos, don’t let anyone be careless.
Warn the Turners and the Canvasses to stay safe.”
    “Aw, kitten, everyone knows to be careful. After what you said on the Report, I think
people will be braver than you’d guess.”
    “I hope so.” I looked down at my shoes and had a funny flashback. Right now my feet
were covered with jeweled heels. Five months ago they were wearing dingy flats.
    “You made me proud, America. Sometimes I’m surprised at the things you say, but I don’t
know why. You were always stronger than you knew.”
    Something about his voice then was so genuine that I was humbled. No one’s opinion of
me mattered as much as his.
    “Thanks, Dad.”
    “I’m serious, now. Not every princess would say something like that.”
    I rolled my eyes. “Uh, Dad, I’m not a princess.”
    “Matter of time,” he shot back playfully. “Speaking of which, how is Maxon?”
    “Good,” I said, fidgeting with my dress. The silence grew. “I really like him, Dad.”
    “Yeah?”
    “Yeah.”
    “Why exactly?”
    I thought for a minute. “I’m not really sure. But part of it is that he makes me feel like me,
I think.”
    “Did you ever feel like not you?” Dad joked.
    “No, it’s like . . . I’ve always been aware of my number. Even when I came to the palace, I
obsessed about it for a while. Was I a Five or a Three? Did I want to be a One? But now I’m
not conscious of it at all. And I think it’s because of him.
    “He screws up a lot, don’t get me wrong.” Dad chuckled. “But when I’m with him I feel
like I’m America. I’m not a caste or a project. I don’t even think of him as elevated, really.
He’s just him, and I’m just me.”
    Dad was quiet for a moment. “That sounds really nice, kitten.”
    Boy talk with my dad was a little awkward, but he was the only one back home who I
thought saw Maxon more like a person than a celebrity; no one else would get it like he
would.
    “Yeah. It’s not perfect though,” I added as Silvia poked her head in the doorway. “I feel like
there’s always something going wrong.”
    She gave me a pointed look and mouthed Breakfast. I nodded.
    “Well, that’s okay, too. Mistakes mean it’s real.”
    “I’ll try to remember that. Listen, Dad, I’ve got to go. I’m late.”
    “Can’t have that. Take care, kitten, and write your sister soon.”
    “I will. Love you, Daddy.”
   “Love you.”

As the girls exited after breakfast, Maxon and I lingered in the dining room. The queen
passed, winking in my direction, and I felt my cheeks redden. But the king came along soon
after, and the look in his eyes took away any lingering blush.
    Once we were alone, Maxon walked over to me and laced his fingers through mine. “I’d
ask what you want to do today, but our options are pretty limited. No archery, no hunting, no
riding, no anything outside.”
    I sighed. “Not even if we took a slew of guards?”
    “I’m sorry, America.” He gave me a sad smile. “But what about a movie? We can watch
something with spectacular scenery.”
    “It’s not the same.” I pulled on his arm. “Come on. Let’s go make the best of it.”
    “That’s the spirit,” he said. Something about that actually made me feel better, like we
were in this together. It had been a while since it really felt that way.
    We went into the hallway and were headed toward the stairway to the theater when I
heard the musical clinks on the window.
    I turned my head to the sound and gasped in wonder. “It’s raining.”
    I let go of Maxon’s arm and pressed my hand against the glass. In the months I’d been at
the palace, it had yet to rain, and I’d wondered if it ever would. Now that I could see it, I
realized I missed it. I missed the ebb and flow of seasons, the way things changed.
    “It’s so beautiful,” I whispered.
    Maxon stood behind me, wrapping an arm around my waist. “Leave it to you to find
beauty in something others would say ruins a day.”
    “I wish I could touch it.”
    He sighed. “I know you do, but it’s just not—”
    I turned to Maxon, trying to see why he cut himself off. He looked up and down the hall,
and I did the same. Besides a couple of guards, we were alone.
    “Come on,” he said, grabbing my hand. “Let’s hope we’re not seen.”
    I smiled, ready for whatever adventure he had in mind. I loved when Maxon was like this.
We wound our way up the stairs, heading for the fourth floor. For a moment, I got nervous,
worried he’d show me something similar to the hidden library. That hadn’t turned out so well
for me.
    We walked down to the middle of the floor, passing one guard on his rounds but no one
else. Maxon pulled me into a large parlor and steered me to the wall next to a wide, dormant
fireplace. He reached inside the lip of the fireplace and, sure enough, found a hidden latch.
He pushed open a panel in the wall, and it led to yet another secret stairwell.
    “Hold my hand,” he said, stretching his out to me. I did so, following him up the dimly lit
steps until we came to a door. Maxon undid the simple lock, pulled open the door . . . and
there was a wall of rain.
    “The roof?” I asked over the sound.
    He nodded. There were walls surrounding the entrance, leaving an open space about as
large as my bedroom to walk on. It didn’t matter that all I could see were walls and sky. At
least I was outside.
    Positively beside myself, I stepped forward, reaching into the water. The drops were fat
and warm as they collected on my arm and ran down to my dress. I heard Maxon laugh once
before shoving me out into the downpour.
    I gasped, soaked in seconds. Turning around, I grabbed his arm, and he smiled as he
pretended to fight. His hair fell in strands around his eyes as we were both quickly drenched,
and he was still grinning as he pulled me over to the edge of the wall.
    “Look,” he said into my ear.
    I turned, noticing our view for the first time. I stared in awe as the city spread out in front
of me. The web of streets, the geometry of buildings, the array of colors—even dimmed in the
gray hue of rain, it was breathtaking.
    I found myself feeling attached to it all, as if it belonged to me somehow.
    “I don’t want the rebels to take it, America,” he said over the rain, as if he was reading my
mind. “I don’t know how bad the death toll is, but I can tell that my father is keeping it a
secret from me. He’s afraid I’ll call off the Selection.”
    “Is there a way to find out the truth?”
    He debated. “I feel like, if I could get in touch with August, he’d know. I could get a letter
to him, but I’m afraid of putting too much in writing. And I don’t know if I could get him into
the palace.”
    I considered that. “What if we could get to him?”
    Maxon laughed. “How do you suggest we do that?”
    I shrugged playfully. “I’ll work on it.”
    He stared at me, quiet for a minute. “It’s nice to say things out loud. I’m always watching
what I say. I feel like no one can hear me up here, I guess. Just you.”
    “Then go ahead and say anything.”
    He smirked. “Only if you will.”
    “Fine,” I answered, happy to play along.
    “Well, what do you want to know?”
    I wiped the wet hair from my forehead, starting with something important but
impersonal. “Did you really not know about the diaries?”
    “No. But I’m up to speed now. Father made me read them all. If August had come two
weeks ago, I would have thought he was lying about everything, but not anymore. It’s
shocking, America. You only scratched the surface with what you read. I want to tell you
about it, but I can’t yet.”
    “I understand.”
    He stared me down, determined. “How did the girls find out about you taking off my
shirt?”
    I looked at the ground, hesitating. “We were watching the guards work out. I said you
looked as good as any of them without your shirt on. It slipped out.”
    Maxon threw back his head and laughed. “I can’t be mad about that.”
    I smiled. “Have you ever brought anyone else up here?”
    He looked sad. “Olivia. One time, and that’s it.”
    I actually remembered that, come to think of it. He’d kissed her up here, and she’d told us
all about it.
    “I kissed Kriss,” he blurted out, not looking at me. “Recently. For the first time. It seems
only right that you should know.”
    He peeked down, and I gave him a small nod. If I hadn’t seen them kiss myself, if this had
been how I found out, I might have broken down. And even though I already knew, it hurt to
hear him say it.
    “I hate dating you this way.” I fidgeted, my dress getting heavy with water.
    “I know. It’s just how it is.”
    “Doesn’t make it fair.”
    He laughed. “When has anything in either of our lives ever been fair?”
    I gave him that. “I’m not supposed to tell you—and if you let on that you know, he’ll get
worse, I’m sure—but . . . your father’s been saying things to me. He also took away the
payments for my family. None of the other girls has them anymore, so I guess it looked bad
anyway.”
    “I’m sorry,” he said. He looked out over the city. I was temporarily distracted by the way
his shirt was sticking to his chest. “I don’t think there’s a way to undo that one, America.”
    “You don’t have to. I just wanted you to know it was happening. And I can handle it.”
    “You’re too tough for him. He doesn’t understand you.” He reached down for my hand,
and I gave it to him freely.
    I tried to think of anything else I might want to know, but it mostly pertained to the other
girls, and I didn’t want to bother with that. I was sure at this point I could guess close enough
to the truth, and if I was wrong, I didn’t think I wanted that to ruin this.
    Maxon looked down at my wrist. “Do you . . .” He looked up at me, seeming to rethink his
question. “Do you want to dance?”
    I nodded. “But I’m awful.”
    “We’ll go slow.”
    Maxon pulled me close, placing a hand on my waist. I put one hand in his and used the
other to pick up my soaking dress. We swayed, barely moving. I settled my cheek on Maxon’s
chest, he rested his chin on my head, and we spun to the music of the rain.
    As he made his grip on me a little bit tighter, it felt like all the bad had been erased and
Maxon and I were stripped to the core of our relationship. We were friends who realized they
didn’t want to be without each other. We were the other’s opposite in many ways but also so
very similar. I couldn’t call our relationship fate, but it did seem bigger than anything I’d
known before.
    I raised my face to Maxon’s, placing a hand on his cheek, pulling him down for a kiss. His
lips, wet, met mine with a brush of heat. I felt both his hands wrap around my back, holding
me to him as if he’d fall apart otherwise. While the rain pummeled the roof, the whole world
went silent. It felt like there wasn’t enough of him, not enough skin or space or time.
    After all these months of trying to reconcile what I wanted and hoped for, I realized then—
in this moment Maxon created just for us—that it would never make sense. All I could do was
move forward and hope that whenever we drifted, we would somehow find a way back to each
other.
    And we had to. Because . . . because . . .
    For as long as it took to get to this moment, when it came it was fast.
    I loved Maxon. For the first time, I could feel it solidly. I wasn’t keeping the feeling at a
distance, holding on to Aspen and all the what-ifs that went along with him. I wasn’t walking
into Maxon’s affections while keeping one foot out the door in case he let me down. I simply
let it come.
    I loved him.
    I couldn’t pinpoint what made me so certain, but I knew it then, as surely as I knew my
name or the color of the sky or any fact written in a book.
    Could he feel it, too?
    Maxon broke the kiss and looked at me. “You’re so pretty when you’re a mess.”
    I laughed nervously. “Thank you. For that and for the rain and for not giving up.”
    He ran his fingers along my cheek and nose and chin. “You’re worth it. I don’t think you
get that. You’re worth it to me.”
    I felt as if my heart was on the edge of bursting, and I just wanted everything to end today.
My world had settled onto a new axis, and it felt like the only way to handle how dizzy it
made me was for us to finally be real. I felt certain now that it would come. It would have to.
Soon.
    Maxon kissed the tip of my nose. “Let’s go get dry and watch a movie.”
    “Sounds good.”
    I carefully tucked my love for Maxon away in my heart, a little afraid of this feeling.
Eventually, it would have to be shared, but for now it was my secret.
    I tried to wring out my dress in the little canopy where the door was, but it was hopeless. I
was going to leave a little trail of water back to my room.
    “I vote for a comedy,” I said as we went down the stairs, Maxon leading the way.
    “I vote for action.”
    “Well, you just said I was worth it, so I think I’m going to win this one.”
    Maxon laughed. “Nicely done.”
    He chuckled again as he pushed on the panel that led us back into the parlor only to stop
dead in his tracks a second later.
    I peeked over his shoulder to see King Clarkson standing there, looking as irritated as
ever.
    “I’m assuming this was your idea,” he said to Maxon.
    “Yes.”
    “Do you have any idea how much danger you put yourself in?” he demanded.
    “Father, there are no rebels waiting on the roof,” Maxon countered, trying to sound
rational but looking a bit ridiculous in his dripping clothes.
    “One well-aimed bullet is all it would take, Maxon.” He let the words hang in the air. “You
know we’re stretched tight, sending guards to watch the girls’ homes. And dozens of those
who’ve been sent have gone AWOL. We’re vulnerable.” He glared past his son at me. “And
why is it that when anything happens these days, she’s got her hands all over it?”
    We stood there, silent, knowing there was nothing we could say anyway.
    “Get cleaned up,” the king ordered. “You have work to do.”
    “But I—”
    A single look from his father told Maxon that any plans he’d had for the day were done.
    “Very well,” he said, caving.
    King Clarkson took Maxon’s arm and pushed him away, leaving me behind. Over his
shoulder, Maxon mouthed the word Sorry, and I gave him a little smile.
    I wasn’t afraid of the king. Or the rebels. I knew how much Maxon meant to me, and I was
sure that it was all going to work, somehow.
CHAPTER 11

AFTER ENDURING MARY ’S SILENT SMIRK as she made me back up, I went to the Women’s Room,
happy the rain was still coming down. It would always mean something special to me now.
    But while Maxon and I could escape for a little while, once we were out of our bubble, the
tension of the ultimatum the rebels had placed on the Elite was thick. All the girls were
distracted and anxious.
    Celeste wordlessly painted her nails at a nearby table, and I could see the slight tremor in
her hand from time to time. I watched as she cleaned up her mistakes and tried to carry on.
Elise held a book in her hands, but her eyes were trained on the window¸ lost in the
downpour. None of us could quite manage to finish even the smallest task.
    “How do you think it’s going out there?” Kriss asked me, her hand paused over the
needlepoint pillow she was working on.
    “I don’t know,” I answered quietly. “It doesn’t seem like they’d threaten something huge
and then do nothing.” I was penciling out a melody I’d had in my head on some sheet music. I
hadn’t written anything original in nearly six months. There wasn’t much point to it. At
parties, people preferred the classics.
    “Do you think they’re hiding the number of deaths from us?” she wondered.
    “It’s possible. If we leave, they win.”
    Kriss did another stitch. “I’m going to stay no matter what.” Something about the way she
said it seemed to be directed specifically at me. Like I needed to know she wasn’t giving up on
Maxon.
    “Same here,” I promised.

The next day was much of the same, though I’d never been disappointed to see the sun shine
before. The worry was so heavy that it was all we could do to stay put. I ached to run, to put
some of the energy into something.
   After lunch, our return to the Women’s Room was staggered. Elise was reading as I sat
with my sheet music, but Kriss and Celeste were missing. Maybe ten minutes later, Kriss
walked in with full arms. She sat down with drawing paper and a collection of colored pencils.
   “What are you working on?” I asked.
   She shrugged. “Whatever keeps me busy.”
   She sat for a long time with a red pencil in her hand, hovering over the paper.
   “I don’t know what I’m doing,” she finally said. “I know that people are in danger, but I
love him. I don’t want to leave.”
   “The king won’t let anyone die,” Elise offered comfortingly.
   “But people already have died.” Kriss wasn’t argumentative, only worried. “I just need to
think about something else.”
   “I bet Silvia would have work for us,” I offered.
   Kriss gave a single chuckle. “I’m not that desperate.” She put the tip of the pencil down,
making a smooth curve across the page. It was a start. “Everything will be fine. I’m sure of it.”
   I rubbed my eyes, looking at my music. I needed to switch things up.
   “I’m going to hop over to one of the libraries. I’ll be right back.”
   Elise and Kriss each gave me a cursory nod as they attempted to focus on their tasks, and I
stood to leave.
   I wandered down the hall to one of the rooms on the far end of the floor. There were a few
books on those shelves I’d been wanting to read. The door of the parlor swung open quietly,
and I realized I wasn’t alone. Someone was crying.
   I searched for the source and found Celeste, hugging her knees to her chest, sitting on the
wide perch of a windowsill. I felt immediately awkward. Celeste did not cry. Up until this
moment, I hadn’t even been sure she was capable.
   The only thing to do was leave, but as she wiped her eyes, she caught sight of me.
   “Ugh!” she whined. “What do you want?”
   “Nothing. Sorry. I was looking for a book.”
   “Well, get it and go. You get everything you want anyway.”
   I stood there blankly for a moment, confused by her words. She heaved a sigh and pushed
herself up from her seat. Snatching one of her many magazines, she flung the glossy pages at
me, and I caught it clumsily.
   “See for yourself. Your little speech on the Report pushed you over the top. They love
you.” Her voice was angry, accusing. As if I’d planned this all along.
   I turned the magazine right side up, finding half of the page full of pictures of the four
remaining girls with a graph beside our photos. Above the image, an elegant headline asked
Who do YOU want as Queen? Next to my face, a wide line shot out, showing thirty-nine
percent of the people were pulling for me. It wasn’t as high as I thought it should be for
whoever won. but it was much higher than the others!
   Quotes from those polled edged the graph, saying that Celeste was positively regal, though
she was in third. Elise was so poised, it said, but she also only had eight percent of the
population pulling for her. By my picture were opinions that made me want to cry.
   “Lady America is just like the queen. She’s a fighter. It’s more than wanting her; we need
her!”
   I stared at the words. “Is . . . is this real?”
   Celeste snatched back the magazine. “Of course it’s real. So go ahead, marry him or
whatever. Be princess. Everyone will love it. The sad little Five gets a crown.”
   She started walking away, her sour mood ruining the most incredible news I’d gotten
during the entirety of the Selection.
   “You know, I don’t even see why this matters so much to you. Some very happy Two is
going to marry you anyway. And you’re still going to be famous when this is over,” I accused.
   “As a has-been, America.”
   “You’re a model, for goodness’ sake!” I yelled. “You’ve got everything.”
   “But for how long?” she shot back. Then quieter. “How long?”
   “What do you mean?” I said, my voice becoming softer. “Celeste, you’re beautiful. You’re a
Two for the rest of your life.”
   She was shaking her head before I was even done speaking. “You think you’re the only
one who’s ever felt trapped by your caste? Yes, I’m a model. I can’t sing. I can’t act. So when
my face isn’t good enough anymore, they’re going to forget all about me. I’ve got maybe five
years left, ten if I’m lucky.”
   She stared at me. “You’ve spent your whole life in the background. I can see you miss it
sometimes. Well, I’ve spent mine in the spotlight. Maybe it’s a stupid fear to you, but it’s real
for me: I don’t want to lose it.”
    “That makes sense, actually.”
    “Yeah?” she dabbed under her eyes, gazing out the window.
    I walked over and stood beside her. “Yeah. But, Celeste, did you ever even like him?”
    She tilted her head to the side, thinking. “He’s cute. And a great kisser,” she added with a
smile.
    I grinned back. “I know.”
    “I know you do. That was a serious blow to my plan, when I found out how far you two
had gone. I thought I had him in the palm of my hand, making him dream about the
possibility of more.”
    “That’s no way to get to someone’s heart.”
    “I didn’t need his heart,” she confessed. “I just needed him to want me enough to keep
me. Fine, it’s not love. I need the fame more than I need the love.”
    For the first time, she wasn’t my enemy. I understood that now. Yes, she was conniving
when it came to the competition, but that was her being desperate. She simply felt she had to
intimidate us out of something that most of us wanted but that she felt she needed.
    “First of all, you do need the love. Everyone does. And it’s okay to want that right along
with the fame.”
    She rolled her eyes but didn’t interrupt.
    “Second of all, the Celeste Newsome I know doesn’t need a man to get fame.”
    She laughed out loud at that. “I have been a bit vicious,” she said, more playful than
ashamed.
    “You ripped my dress!”
    “Well, at the time I needed it!”
    And suddenly all of it was funny. All the arguing, the wicked faces, the little tricks—they
felt like a really long joke. We stood there for a minute, laughing over the past few months,
and I found myself wanting to look after her the way I did Marlee.
    Surprisingly, her laughter faded away quickly, and she averted her eyes as she spoke.
    “I’ve done so many things, America. Horrible, shameful things. Part of it was not reacting
well to the stress of this, but mostly it was because I was ready to do anything to get that
crown, to get to Maxon.”
    I was a little shocked as I watched my hand rise up to pat her on the shoulder.
    “Honestly,” I started, “I don’t think you need Maxon to get anything you want out of life.
You’ve got the drive, the talent; and probably, most importantly, you’ve got the ability. Half of
the country would give anything to have what you have.”
    “I know,” she said. “It’s not that I’m completely unaware of how lucky I am. It’s just hard
to accept the possibility of . . . I don’t know, being less.”
    “Then don’t accept it.”
    She shook her head. “I didn’t stand a chance, did I? It’s been you the whole time.”
    “Not only me,” I admitted. “Kriss. She’s at the top, too.”
    “Do you need me to break her leg? I could make it happen.” She chuckled to herself. “I’m
kidding.”
    “You want to come back with me? It’s hard to sit through the days right now, and you do
add a little something to the mix.”
    “Not right now. I don’t want the others to know I was crying.” She gave me a pleading
look.
    “Not a word, I promise.”
    “Thanks.”
    There was a tense pause, as if one of us ought to say more. It felt significant, this moment
of finally, truly seeing Celeste. I wasn’t sure if I could let go of everything she’d done to me,
but at least I understood now. There was nothing to add, so I gave her a little wave and left.
    Only once I closed the door did I realize that I’d forgotten to grab a book. And then I
thought of the glossy chart with my smiling face and the huge number beside it. I’d have to
tug my ear at dinner. Maxon needed to know about this. I hoped that maybe if he knew how
the people felt about me, it would raise his feelings a little closer to the surface.
    As I reached the corner to turn toward the Women’s Room, a familiar face reminded me
that I had even bigger plans to think about right now. I’d told Maxon that I’d find us a way to
get to August, and I felt certain our only shot was coming my way.
    Aspen walked down the hall, seeming even bigger and taller than the last time I’d seen
him.
    I looked around, seeing if we were alone. There were a few guards down the hall just past
him, but they were out of earshot.
    “Hey,” I said, beckoning him over. I bit my lip, hoping that Aspen would be as able as I
thought he was. “I need your help.”
    Without batting an eye, he responded. “Anything.”
CHAPTER 12

I WAS RIGHT. ASPEN HAD every corner of the palace memorized, and he knew exactly how to get
us out of it.
    “Are you quite sure about this?” Maxon asked as we got dressed in my room the following
evening.
    “We need to know what’s going on. I have no doubt we’ll be safe,” I assured him.
    We spoke through the cracked-open bathroom door as he dropped the pieces of his suit to
the floor and climbed into the denim and cotton a Six would wear. Aspen’s clothes were going
to be a bit big on Maxon, but they would do. Thankfully, Aspen had found a smaller guard to
borrow clothes from for me, but even then I had to roll up the hem of the pants several times
to find my feet.
    “You seem to trust this guard a lot,” Maxon commented, and I couldn’t figure out the tone
he was using. Perhaps he was anxious.
    “My maids say he’s one of the best you have. And he got me to the safe room that time the
Southerners came, when everyone was running late. He always looks ready to go, even when
things are quiet. I have a good feeling about him. Trust me.”
    I heard the rustling of clothes as he continued. “How did you know he could get us out of
the palace?”
    “I didn’t. I just asked.”
    “And he simply told you?” Maxon replied, astonished.
    “Well, I told him it was for you, of course.”
    He made a sound, something like a sigh. “I still don’t think you should come.”
    “I’m going, Maxon. Are you done yet?”
    “Yes. I need to get my shoes on.”
    I opened the door, and after a quick once-over, Maxon started laughing. “I’m sorry. I’m
used to seeing you in gowns.”
    “You look a bit different when you’re not in a suit yourself.” And he did, but not in any
way that was close to comical. Even though Aspen’s clothes were too big, Maxon looked good
in plain old denim. The shirt had short sleeves, and I got a peek at those strong arms I’d only
ever seen the one time in the safe room.
    “These pants are far too heavy. Why are you so partial to jeans?” he asked, remembering
my request from my very first day in the palace.
    I shrugged. “I just like them.”
    He smiled at me, shaking his head a bit. He walked over to my closet, not asking if it was
all right to open it. “We need something to hold your pants up or it’s going to be a very
scandalous evening. Well, more so than it already is.”
    Maxon pulled out a dark-red sash and returned to me with it, lacing it through my belt
loops.
    I couldn’t say why, but this felt meaningful. My heart pounded, and for a minute I
wondered if he could hear it shouting how much I loved him. If so, he ignored it in favor of
the business at hand.
    “Listen,” he said, making a little knot in the sash, “what we’re doing is very dangerous. If
something happens, I want you to run. Don’t even try to get back to the palace. Find a family
who will hide you through the night.”
    Maxon stepped back and looked into my worried eyes. I tilted my head. “Right now, asking
a family to hide me is almost as dangerous as facing the rebels. People might be upset that we
girls aren’t leaving the competition.”
    “If the article Celeste showed you is right, then people might be proud of you.”
    I wanted to tell Maxon I disagreed, but a knock at the door interrupted us. He went over to
answer it, and quickly Aspen and a second guard walked into my dimly lit room.
    “Your Majesty,” Aspen said with a small bow. “Lady America has informed me that you
need to get outside the palace walls.”
    Maxon sighed deeply. “Yes. And I hear you’re the man to help me. Officer . . .” He looked
for Aspen’s badge. “Leger.”
    Aspen nodded. “It’s not very difficult, actually. The secrecy might be more of an issue than
getting out in the first place.”
    “How so?”
    “Well, I have to assume there’s a reason for you to be doing this at night, without the
king’s knowledge. If we’re specifically asked,” Aspen said, glancing over to the other guard, “I
don’t think we could lie to him.”
    “And I wouldn’t ask you to. I’m hoping to be able to reveal this to my father soon enough,
but, for tonight, discretion is imperative.”
    “It shouldn’t be a problem.” Aspen hesitated. “I don’t think the lady should go.”
    As if he’d won the argument, Maxon looked at me with a face that said See!
    I stood as tall as I could manage. “I’m not just going to sit here. I’ve been chased by rebels
once already, and I’m fine.”
    “But those weren’t Southerners,” Maxon countered.
    “I’m going,” I said. “And we’re wasting time.”
    “To be clear, no one agrees with you.”
    “To be clear, I don’t care.”
    Sighing, Maxon pulled the knit hat over his hair. “So what do we need to do?”
    “The plan is pretty simple,” Aspen said decisively. “Twice a week, a truck is sent out for
groceries. Sometimes the kitchen staff simply falls short of the needs for the week, so the
truck goes out again to pick up whatever’s lacking. Usually people from the kitchen go, along
with a few guards.”
    “And no one will suspect?” I asked.
    Aspen shook his head. “These runs are often done at night. If the cook says we need more
eggs for breakfast, well, we’d better go before sunup.”
    Maxon ran over to his suit pants, rummaging through his pocket. “I did manage to get a
note out to August. He said we should meet him at this address.” Maxon handed the paper to
Aspen, who shared the note with the other guard.
    “You know where this is?” Aspen asked.
    The guard—a dark-skinned young man whose name tag I finally noticed said AVERY —
nodded. “Not the best part of town, but close enough to the food storage area that we
shouldn’t raise any alarm.”
    “All right,” Aspen said. He looked at me. “Tuck your hair beneath your hat.”
    I grabbed my hair and twisted it up, hoping it would all fit beneath the knit hat Aspen had
provided. I pushed up the last strands and looked to Maxon. “Well?”
    He choked on a laugh. “Great.”
    I gave him a playful punch in the arm before turning to follow Aspen’s next instructions.
    I saw the hurt in his eyes to see me so casual with Maxon. And maybe it went beyond that.
We’d hid in a tree house for two years, but here I was wandering into the streets, past curfew,
with the man the Southern rebels wanted to see dead more than anyone.
    This moment was a slap in the face of everything we were.
    And even though I wasn’t in love with Aspen, he still mattered to me, and I didn’t want to
cause him pain.
    Before Maxon probably even noticed, Aspen straightened his face. “Follow us.”
    Slipping into the hallway, Aspen and Officer Avery took us down the stairway that led to
the massive safe room reserved for the royal family. Instead of heading toward the great steel
doors, we moved quickly across the length of the palace, where we ascended another spiral
staircase. I had assumed we would be heading to the first floor, but we exited into the
kitchen.
    Immediately, I was hit with billowing warmth and the sweet smell of bread rising. For a
split second, it felt like home. I expected something clinical, professional, like the big
bakeries we had in Carolina on the nice end of town. But there were huge wooden tables with
vegetables laid out, ready to be prepped. Notes were left in places, reminding whoever was on
duty next of what had to be done. All in all, the kitchen seemed cozy, even for as big as it was.
    “Keep your heads down,” Officer Avery whispered to Maxon and me.
    We studied the floor as Aspen called out. “Delilah?”
    “Hold on, honey!” someone shouted back. Her voice was rich and had the slight drawl of a
southern accent that I’d heard sometimes back in Carolina. Heavy footsteps came around the
corner, but I avoided looking up to see the woman’s face. “Leger, you cutie, how’ve you
been?”
    “Been good. Just heard there was a delivery to pick up, and I was wondering if you had a
list for me.”
    “Delivery? Not that I know of.”
    “That’s funny. I was sure.”
    “Might as well drive out,” she said, no hint of worry or suspicion in her voice. “Don’t want
to miss something.”
    “Good point. Shouldn’t be too long,” Aspen answered. I heard the swift sound of him
catching a set of keys. “See you later, Delilah. If you’re asleep, I’ll put the keys on the hook.”
    “Okay, honey. You come see me soon. It’s been too long.”
    “Will do.”
    Aspen was already walking, and we followed him wordlessly. I smiled to myself. The
woman, Delilah, had a deeper voice, mature sounding. But even she was sweet on Aspen.
    We walked around a corner and up a wide incline to a set of broad doors. Aspen undid the
lock and pushed the doors open. Waiting in the dark was a large black truck.
    “There’s nothing to hold on to, but I think you two should get in the back,” Avery said. I
looked at the large cargo space. At least we wouldn’t be recognized.
    I went around to the back, where Aspen was already opening the doors. “My lady,” he said,
offering me his hand, which I took. “Your Majesty,” he added as Maxon passed, refusing
assistance.
   There were a couple of crates inside and a shelving unit along one wall, but otherwise it
was an empty metal box. Maxon passed me, surveying the area.
   “Come here, America,” he said, pointing to the corner. “We’ll wedge ourselves against the
shelf.”
   “We’ll try to drive smoothly,” Aspen called.
   Maxon nodded. Aspen gave us both a solemn look before shutting the doors.
   In the pitch-dark, I pushed myself against Maxon.
   “Are you scared?” he asked.
   “No.”
   “Me neither.”
   But I was pretty sure we were both lying.
CHAPTER 13

I COULDN’T TELL HOW LONG we’d been traveling, but I was very aware of every move the giant
truck made. Maxon, in an effort to keep us stable, had pushed his back against the shelf and
braced a leg across me on the wall, caging me in. But even with that, we both slid a bit against
the metal floor at every turn.
    “I don’t like not knowing where I am,” Maxon said, trying to secure us again.
    “Have you ever been out in Angeles before?”
    “Only in a car,” he confessed.
    “Is it strange that I feel better going into a den of rebels than I did when I had to entertain
the women of the Italian royal family?”
    Maxon laughed. “Only you.”
    It was hard talking over the rumble of the engine and the squeal of the wheels, so we were
quiet for a while. In the dark, the sounds felt bigger. I inhaled deeply, trying to focus myself,
and noticed a hint of coffee in the air. I couldn’t tell if it was some lingering scent in the truck
or if we were passing a shop on the road. After what felt like a very long time, Maxon put his
lips to my ear.
    “I wish you were safe at home, but I’m really glad you’re here.” I laughed quietly. I
doubted he could hear it, but he probably felt it, we were so close. “Promise me that you’ll run
though.”
    I decided that I’d be of no help to Maxon if something really bad happened anyway. I
searched and put my mouth by his ear. “I promise.”
    We went over a pretty jarring bump, and he grabbed me. I felt our noses brush in the dark,
and the urge to kiss him came unexpectedly fast. Though our kiss on the roof had only been
three days ago, it felt like an eternity. He held me close, and I could feel his breath on my
skin. It was coming; I was sure of it.
    Maxon used his nose, nudging at my cheek, bringing our lips closer together. The same
way I could smell coffee and hear every tiny squeak in the dark, the lack of light made me
focus on the clean scent that hung around Maxon, feel the pressure of his fingers moving up
my neck to the wisps of hair peeking out from under my cap.
    In the second before our lips touched, the truck came to an abrupt stop, flinging us
forward. I knocked my head against the wall, and I was pretty sure I felt Maxon’s teeth
against my ear.
    “Ow!” he exclaimed, and I felt him adjusting his position in the dark. “Are you hurt?”
    “No. My hair and the hat took most of it.” If I hadn’t wanted that kiss so badly, I would
have laughed.
    As soon as we’d stopped, we started moving slowly in reverse. After a few seconds, the
truck halted again and the engine cut off. Maxon switched positions, and it felt as if he was
ducking low in a crouch, facing the door. I got into a similar position as one of Maxon’s hands
come back to protect me, just in case.
    The light of the streetlamp coming into the cabin was shocking, and I squinted against it
as someone climbed into the back of the truck.
    “We’re here,” said Officer Avery. “Follow me closely.”
     Maxon stood and extended a hand to me. He let go to hop out of the truck, then reached
up to help me down and immediately slid his hand back into mine. The thing I noticed right
away was the large brick wall cornering us in the alley, followed by the stinging smell of
something rotting. Aspen was standing in front of us, looking around intently, a gun held low
in his hand.
     He and Avery started moving toward the back entrance of the building, and we kept close
to them. The walls surrounding us were high and reminded me of the apartment buildings
back home with their fire escapes snaking down the sides, though this didn’t seem like an
area where people lived. Aspen knocked on the grime-covered door and waited. It cracked
open, a small chain there to protect whoever was inside. But I saw August’s eyes before the
door was quickly shut again. The next time, it opened wide, and August ushered in all of us.
     “Hurry,” he said quietly.
     In the shadowy room was a younger boy and Georgia. I could see she was just as anxious
as we were, and I couldn’t stop myself from bolting across the room to embrace her. She held
me back, and I was happy to find I’d acquired an unexpected friend.
     “Were you followed?” she asked.
     Aspen shook his head. “No. But you should be quick.”
     Georgia pulled me over to a small table, and Maxon sat next to me, with August and the
younger boy beside him.
     “How bad is it?” Maxon asked. “I have a feeling my father is keeping the truth from me.”
     August gave a surprised shrug. “As best we can tell, the numbers are low. The Southerners
are doing their typical destruction, but as far as the attacks on Twos specifically, it looks like
it’s less than three hundred people.”
     I gasped. Three hundred people? How could that be deemed low?
     “America, it’s not that bad, all things considered,” Maxon comforted me, taking my hand
again.
     “He’s right,” Georgia said, her face warm. “It could have been so much worse.”
     “It’s what I would expect from them: starting at the top and working their way down.
We’re guessing they’ll pick it up before too long,” August interjected. “It looks like the attacks
are still isolated on the Twos, but we’re watching and will alert you if or when that changes.
We’ve got allies in every province, and they’re all trying to keep watch. But there’s only so
much they can do without exposing themselves, and we all know what would happen if they
did.”
     Maxon nodded soberly. They’d die, of course.
     “Should we cave?” Maxon suggested. I looked over at him, surprised.
     “Trust us,” Georgia said. “They’re not going to get any better if you give in.”
     “But there must be something more we can do,” Maxon insisted.
     “You’ve already done something pretty empowering. Well, she did,” August said, dipping
his head in my direction. “From what we’re able to tell, farmers are keeping their axes with
them if they leave their fields, seamstresses walk the street with scissors clutched in their
hands, and you’ll see Twos parading around with disarming spray. No matter the caste,
everyone seems to have found some way to arm themselves, just in case. Your people don’t
want to live in fear, and they’re not. They’re fighting back.”
     I wanted to cry. For maybe the first time in all of the Selection, I’d done something right.
     Maxon squeezed my hand, proud. “That’s a comfort,” he said. “Still, it doesn’t feel like
enough.”
    I nodded. I was so happy the public wasn’t rolling over, but there had to be a way to stop
this once and for all.
    August sighed. “We’ve wondered if there was a way for us to attack them. They’re not
fighting with any sort of training—they just go after people. Our supporters are nervous about
being identified, but they’re everywhere. And they might be the best source for a surprise
assault.
    “In many ways, we’re already an army of sorts, but we’re essentially unarmed. We can’t
possibly beat the Southerners when the majority of our forces fight with bricks or rakes.”
    “You want weapons?”
    “Wouldn’t hurt.”
    Maxon considered this. “There are things you can do that we simply can’t from the palace.
But I don’t like the idea of sending any of my people on a mission to take out these savages.
Certainly they would die.”
    “That’s possible,” August confessed.
    “There’s also the small issue of me not being able to guarantee you won’t use any
weapons I give you against me eventually.”
    August snorted. “I don’t know how to make you believe that we’re on your side, but it’s
true. All we’ve ever wanted was to see an end to the castes, and we’re prepared to support you
to that end. I have no intentions of ever harming you, Maxon, and I think you know that.” He
and Maxon shared a very long look. “If you didn’t, you wouldn’t be here now.”
    “Your Majesty,” Aspen said. “I’m sorry to interrupt, but there are some of us who would
like to see the Southern rebels gone as much as you would. I would personally volunteer to
train anyone in something more along the lines of hand-to-hand combat.”
    My chest swelled with pride. That was my Aspen, always trying to fix things.
    Maxon nodded at him before turning back to August. “That’s something I’ll need time to
think about. I might be able to provide training, but I couldn’t arm you. Even if I was sure of
your intentions, if there’s any link between us, I can’t imagine what my father would do.”
    Without thinking, Maxon flexed the muscles across his back. It seemed to me that maybe
he’d done that a lot in the time I’d known him, only I hadn’t understood its meaning. Even
now he was hyperaware of his secret.
    “True. In fact, you should probably already be leaving. I’ll get word to you as soon as we
have more information, but for now it looks good. Well, as good as we could hope for.”
August passed Maxon a note. “We have one landline. You can call if there’s something urgent.
Micah here, he’s on top of those things.”
    August motioned to the boy who hadn’t made a sound the whole time. He pulled his lips
into his mouth like he might be biting them and gave us a small nod. Something about his
stance suggested he was both shy and eager at once.
    “Very good. I’ll use it with discretion.” Maxon placed the paper in his pocket. “I’ll be in
touch soon.” He stood and I followed suit, looking over at Georgia as I did so.
    She came around the table to me. “Be safe getting back. And that number is for you, too,
you know.”
    “Thank you.” I gave her a quick hug and headed out with Maxon, Aspen, and Officer
Avery. I took one last glance at our strange friends before the door closed and was bolted
behind us.
     “Get away from the truck,” Aspen said. I turned to see what he meant, as we weren’t even
close yet.
     Then I saw that Aspen wasn’t talking to me. A handful of men were circling the vehicle.
One had a wrench in his hands, looking as if he was about to try and steal the tires. Another
two were at the back, trying to open the metal doors.
     “Just give us the food, and we’ll go,” one said. He looked younger than most of the others,
maybe Aspen’s age. His voice was cold and desperate.
     I hadn’t noticed back at the palace that the truck we were jumping into had a massive Illéa
emblem on the side. As I stood there looking at the small crowd of haggard men, this seemed
like an incredibly stupid oversight. And while Maxon and I weren’t dressed like ourselves,
that wouldn’t help very much if anyone got too close. Even though I wouldn’t have known the
first thing to do with one, I wished I had a weapon.
     “There is no food,” Aspen said calmly. “And if there was, it wouldn’t be yours to take.”
     “How well they train their puppets,” another man remarked. As he gave us an amused
smile, I could see that a few of his teeth were missing. “What were you before they turned
you into this?”
     “Step away from the truck,” Aspen ordered.
     “You couldn’t have been a Two or a Three; you’d have bought your way out. So come on,
little man, what were you?” the toothless man taunted, stepping closer.
     “Back. Away.” Aspen put one hand in front of himself, reaching down toward his hip with
the other.
     The man stopped, shaking his head. “You don’t know who you’re messing with, boy.”
     “Wait!” someone said. “That’s her. That’s one of the girls.”
     I turned my head to the voice, giving myself away.
     “Get her!” the young one said.
     Before I could even think, Maxon jerked me back. I saw a blur of Aspen and Officer Avery
pulling out their guns as my head got whipped around by the force of Maxon’s strong arms. I
was moving sideways, stumbling to keep up while Aspen and Avery held the men at bay.
Quickly, Maxon and I were against the brick wall, trapped.
     “I don’t want to kill you,” Aspen said. “Leave. Now!”
     The toothless man chuckled darkly, his hands raised in front of him as if he meant no
harm. In a move so fast I nearly missed it, he reached down and drew a gun of his own. Aspen
fired, and shots came in return.
     “Come on, America,” Maxon said urgently.
     Come where? I thought, my heart pounding in terror.
     I looked at him and saw that he had laced his fingers together, making a cradle for my
foot. Suddenly understanding, I put my shoe in his hands, and he pushed me up as I grappled
at the wall for some stability. I reached the top, and I felt something funny in my arm as I
crawled over.
     I ignored it as I pulled my body across the ledge, lowering myself as much as I could
before dropping to the concrete. I fell to the side, positive I’d messed up my hip or leg; but
Maxon had instructed me to run if I was in danger, so I did.
     I didn’t know why I assumed he would be right behind me, but when I reached the end of
the street and he wasn’t there, I realized no one would be free to give him a boost. In that
moment, I noticed that funny feeling in my arm was starting to burn. I looked down, and in
the faint glow of a streetlight, I saw something wet coming from a rip in my sleeve.
    I’d been shot.
    I’d been shot?
    There were guns and I was there, but it didn’t seem real. Still, there was no denying the
searing pain that was growing bigger every second. I cupped my hand over the wound, but
that made it worse.
    I looked around. The city was still.
    Of course it was. We were out well after curfew. I’d gotten so used to the palace that I’d
forgotten that the world outside stopped after eleven.
    If an officer came by, I’d be thrown in jail. How was I supposed to explain that to the
king? How are you going to talk away a bullet wound, America?
    I started moving, staying to the shadows. I had no idea where to go. I didn’t know if trying
to get back to the palace was a good idea. Even if it was, I didn’t know how to get there.
    God, the burning. It was hard to think. I made my way past a narrow backstreet between
two apartment buildings. That alone told me I wasn’t in the best part of town. Generally, only
Sixes and Sevens had to squeeze into apartments.
    There was nowhere for me to go, so I walked down the poorly lit alley, tucking myself
behind a tight pack of trash cans. The night was cool, but it had been a typical hot Angeles
day, and the stink was rising from the metal bins. Between the smell and the pain, I felt
myself on the edge of vomiting.
    I peeled off my right sleeve, trying not to irritate the wound any more than necessary. My
hands were trembling, either from fear or adrenaline, and just bending my arm made me
want to scream. I bit my lips together to keep the sound in, but even with that my muffled
whimpers escaped into the night.
    “What happened?” a tiny voice asked.
    I jerked my head up, looking for the source. There were two glittering eyes in the darker
depths of the alley.
    “Who’s there?” I asked, voice trembling.
    “I won’t hurt you,” she said, crawling out. “I’m having a bad night, too.”
    The girl, maybe fifteen if I had to guess, crept out of the shadows and came to look at my
arm. She sucked in a breath at the sight.
    “That looks really painful,” she said sympathetically.
    “I got shot,” I blurted, ready to cry. It burned so badly.
    “Shot?”
    I nodded.
    She looked at me hesitantly, like maybe she should run away. “I don’t know what you did
or who you are, but you don’t mess with rebels, okay?”
    “Huh?”
    “I haven’t been out here long, but I know that the only people who can get guns are rebels.
Whatever you did to them, don’t do it again.”
    In all the times they’d attacked us, I’d never considered that. No one was supposed to have
a gun unless they were an officer. Only a rebel would be able to get around that. Even August
had just said the Northerners were essentially unarmed. I wondered if he’d been carrying
tonight.
    “What’s your name?” she asked. “I know you’re a girl under there.”
     “Mer,” I said.
     “I’m Paige. Looks like you’re new to being an Eight yourself. Your clothes are pretty
clean.” She was turning my arm gently, looking at the oozing wound as if she could do
something even though we both knew better.
     “Something like that,” I hedged.
     “You can starve out here if you’re alone. You got anywhere to go?”
     I shuddered with a roll of pain. “Not exactly.”
     She nodded. “It was just my dad and me. I was a Four. We had a restaurant, but my
grandma had made some rule that he was supposed to leave it to my aunt when he died, not
to me. I think she was worried my aunt wouldn’t have anything or something like that. Well,
my aunt hates me, always has. She got the restaurant, but she got me, too. Didn’t like that.
     “Two weeks after Dad died, she started hitting me. I had to sneak food because she said I
was getting fat and wouldn’t give me anything to eat. I thought about going to a friend’s
house, but my aunt would just be able to come and get me, so I left. I took some money, but
not enough. Even if it was, I got robbed my second night out here.”
     I looked Paige over as she talked. I could see it, under the growing layer of grime. There
was a girl in there who used to be very well taken care of. She was trying to be tough now. She
had to be. What else was there for her?
     “Just this week I found a group of girls. We work together and share all the profits. If you
can forget what you’re doing, it’s not so bad. I have to cry afterward. That’s why I was hiding
back there. If the other girls see you cry, they make my aunt look like a saint. J. J. says they’re
just trying to toughen me up and that I better get that way fast, but it still hurts.
     “Anyway, you’re pretty. I know they’d be glad to have you.”
     My stomach rolled, processing her offer. In what seemed like a few weeks, she’d lost her
family, her home, and herself.
     And still she was sitting in front of me—a girl who’d been chased by a pack of rebels, a girl
who could be nothing but danger—and she was kind.
     “We can’t get you a doctor, but there would be something to ease the pain. And they could
get you some stitches from this guy they know. You’d have to work it off though.”
     I focused on my breathing. Even though she was distracting, the conversation couldn’t
stop the pain.
     “You don’t talk much, do you?” Paige asked.
     “Not when I’ve been shot.”
     She laughed, and the ease of it made me laugh a little, too. Paige sat down beside me for a
little while, and I was glad I wasn’t alone.
     “If you don’t want to come with me, I get it. It’s dangerous and kind of sad.”
     “I . . . can we just be quiet for a minute?” I asked.
     “Yes. Do you want me to stay with you?”
     “Please.”
     And she did. Without question, she sat beside me, as silent as a mouse. It felt like an
eternity was passing, though it couldn’t have even been twenty minutes. The pain was
becoming more severe, and I was getting desperate. Maybe I could get to a doctor. Of course,
I’d have to find one. The palace would pay for it, but I had no clue how to get ahold of Maxon.
     Was Maxon even okay? Was Aspen?
     They were outnumbered, but they were armed. If the rebels recognized me so quickly, did
they recognize Maxon, too? If so, what would they do to him?
   I sat still, trying to talk myself out of the worry. It was all I could do to focus on myself.
But what was I going to do if Aspen died? Or if Maxon—
   “Shh!” I ordered, though Paige still hadn’t made a sound. “Do you hear that?”
   We both tuned our ears to the street.
   “. . . Max,” someone yelled. “Come out, Mer; it’s Max.”
   That would have been Aspen’s idea, no doubt, using those names.
   I scrambled to my feet and went to the edge of the alley, with Paige right behind me. I saw
the truck coming down the street at a snail’s pace, heads poking out of the windows,
searching.
   I turned around. “Paige, would you want to come with me?”
   “Where?”
   “I promise you, you’ll have a real job and food, and no one will hit you.”
   Her heavy eyes filled with tears. “Then I don’t care where it is. I’ll go.”
   I took her with my good hand, my coat sleeve still hanging off the wounded arm. We made
our way down the road, sticking close to the buildings.
   “Max!” I called as we got closer. “Max!”
   The massive truck skidded to a stop, and Maxon, Aspen, and Officer Avery came running
out.
   I dropped Paige’s hand, seeing Maxon’s open arms. He embraced me, hitting my wound,
and I yelled.
   “What’s wrong?” he asked.
   “I was shot.”
   Aspen parted us, grabbing my arm to see for himself. “That could have been a lot worse.
We need to get you back and find a way to treat you. I’m assuming we’ll want to leave the
doctor out of this?” He looked to Maxon.
   “I don’t want her to suffer,” he insisted.
   “Your Majesty,” Paige said, dropping to her knees. Her shoulders started shaking like she
might be crying.
   “This is Paige,” I said, offering nothing else. “Let’s get in the back.”
   Aspen lowered a hand to Paige. “You’re safe,” he assured her.
   Maxon put an arm around me, escorting me to the back of the truck.
   “I was sure it would take all night to find you,” he worried aloud.
   “Me, too. But I was in too much pain to get very far. Paige helped.”
   “Then she’ll be taken care of, I promise.”
   Maxon, Paige, and I crawled into the back of the truck, and the metal floor was strangely
comforting as we sped back to the palace.
CHAPTER 14

IT WAS ASPEN WHO LIFTED me from the back of the truck and hurriedly carried me to a tiny
room. The space was smaller than my bathroom and held two slim beds and a dresser. There
were little notes and photos on the wall, which gave it some personality; but it was otherwise
barren, not to mention incredibly cramped with Aspen, me, Officer Avery, Maxon, and Paige
filling every spare inch.
     Aspen laid me on a bed as gently as possible, but my arm continued to throb.
     “We ought to get the doctor,” he said. But I could tell he doubted his own words. Getting
Dr. Ashlar would mean either telling the absolute truth or making up an outrageous lie, and
neither of those options was something we wanted.
     “Don’t,” I urged weakly. “I won’t die from this. It’ll just be a bad scar. We have to clean it
up.” I grimaced.
     “You’ll need something for the pain,” Maxon added.
     “She might get infected. That alley was really dirty, and I touched her,” Paige said guiltily.
     A sliver of fire burned across the wound, and I hissed. “Anne. Get Anne.”
     “Who?” Maxon asked.
     “Her head maid,” Aspen explained. “Avery, get Anne and a medical kit. We’ll have to make
due. And we need to do something with her,” he added, nodding his head at Paige.
     I watched Maxon’s worried eyes finally move from my bloody arm to Paige’s troubled
face.
     “Are you a criminal? A runaway?” he asked her.
     “Not that kind of criminal. And I did run away, but there’s no one looking for me.”
     Maxon considered her words. “Welcome aboard. Follow Avery down to the kitchens and
tell a Mallory you’ll be working with her on the prince’s command. Instruct her to come to
the officers’ wing immediately.”
     “Mallory. Yes, Your Majesty.” Paige gave him a deep curtsy and followed Officer Avery
from the room, leaving me alone with Maxon and Aspen. I’d been with both of them all night,
but this was the first time it was just the three of us. I could feel the weight of our secrets
filling up the already restricting room.
     “How’d you make it out?” I asked.
     “August, Georgia, and Micah heard the gunshots and came running,” Maxon said. “He
wasn’t kidding when he said they’d never hurt us.” He paused, his eyes quickly distant and
sad. “Micah didn’t make it.”
     I turned my head away. I didn’t know a thing about him, but he died tonight for us. I felt
as guilty as if I’d taken his life myself.
     I went to wipe a tear away, forgetting to use my left arm, and cried out.
     “Calm down, America,” Aspen said, forgetting to be formal.
     “Everything’s going to work out,” Maxon promised.
     I nodded, pursing my lips together to avoid crying anymore. What a waste.
     We were quiet for what felt like a long time, but maybe it was the pain stretching out the
minutes.
     “It’s wonderful to have such devotion,” Maxon said suddenly.
   At first I thought he was talking about Micah again. But Aspen and I looked over and saw
him gazing at a space on the wall behind me.
   I turned my head, happy to focus on anything that wasn’t the searing pain in my arm.
There, beside several pictures drawn by one of his younger siblings, was a note.

   I’ll always love you. I’ll wait for you forever. I’m with you, no matter what.

     My handwriting was a little sloppier a year ago when I’d left that note by my window for
Aspen to find, and it was surrounded by silly little hearts that I would never put in a love
letter now, but I could still feel the importance of those words. It was the first time I’d put
them in writing, afraid of how much more I felt those things once they were on paper. I also
remembered the fear of my mother finding that note surpassing any other worry about the
enormity of knowing, without a doubt, that I loved Aspen.
     Right now I feared Maxon recognizing my handwriting.
     “It must be nice to have someone to write to. I’ve never had the luxury of love letters,”
Maxon said, a sad smile on his face. “Has she kept her word?”
     Aspen was moving pillows from the other bed to prop under my head, avoiding eye
contact with either Maxon or myself.
     “Writing is difficult,” he said. “But I do know she’s with me, no matter what. I don’t doubt
it.”
     I looked at Aspen’s short, dark hair—the only part of him I could really see—and I felt a
new pain. In a way he was right. We would never truly leave each other. But . . . the words on
that paper? That encompassing love that used to overwhelm me? It wasn’t here anymore.
     Was Aspen still counting on it?
     My eyes flickered to Maxon, and the sadness on his face read a bit like jealousy. I wasn’t
surprised. I remembered telling Maxon that I’d been in love before; he’d looked as if he’d
been cheated out of something, so unsure at that point if he would ever fall in love.
     If he knew that the love I’d spoken about and the love Aspen just shared were the same
one, I was sure it would crush him.
     “Write her soon,” Maxon advised. “Don’t let her forget.”
     “What’s taking them so long?” Aspen muttered, and left the room, not bothering to
acknowledge Maxon’s words.
     Maxon watched him go and turned back to face me. “I’m so useless. I have no idea how to
help you, so I thought I’d at least try to help him. He saved both our lives tonight.” Maxon
shook his head. “Seems I only upset him.”
     “Everyone’s just worried. You’re doing fine,” I assured him.
     He gave an exasperated laugh, coming to kneel by the bed. “You’re lying there with a
seeping gash on your arm, and you’re trying to comfort me. You’re absurd.”
     “If you ever decide to write me a love letter, I’d lead with that,” I joked.
     He smiled. “Can’t I do anything for you?”
     “Hold my hand? Not too hard though.”
     Maxon placed his fingers in the loose grip of my palm, and even though it didn’t change
anything, it was nice to feel him there.
     “I probably won’t. Write you a love letter, that is. I try to stave off embarrassment as often
as possible.”
    “You can’t plan wars, don’t know how to cook, and refuse to write love letters,” I teased.
    “That’s correct. My list of faults is ever growing.” He wiggled his fingers in my hand, and I
was so grateful for the distraction.
    “That’s fine. I’ll continue to guess at your feelings since you refuse to write me a note.
With a purple pen. All the i’s dotted with hearts.”
    “Which is exactly how I would do it,” he said in mock seriousness. I giggled but stopped
quickly when the movement reignited the burning. “I don’t think you have to guess at my
feelings though.”
    “Well,” I started, finding it harder and harder to breathe, “it’s not like you’ve ever said it
out loud.”
    Maxon opened his mouth to object and silenced himself. His eyes gazed toward the ceiling
as he thought through our history, trying to pinpoint the moment when he’d told me he loved
me.
    In the safe room, it was suggested in every way. He’d let the feeling slip into a dozen
romantic gestures or indicated it was there by dancing around the words . . . but the actual
statement had never come. Not between us. I would have remembered, and I would have
made them my reason never to question him, my reason to confess what I was feeling, too.
    “My lady?” Anne said, her voice making its way through the door a moment before her
worried face.
    Maxon stepped back, letting go of my hand as he made space for her.
    Anne’s focused eyes took in the wound, and she touched it gingerly as she inspected how
bad it was.
    “You’ll need stitches. I’m not sure we have anything that will completely numb you,” she
assessed.
    “It’s okay. Just do your best,” I said. I felt calmer with her there.
    She nodded. “Someone get some boiling water. We should have antiseptic in the kit, but I
want water, too.”
    “I’ll get it.” By the door, Marlee was standing, her face lined with worry.
    “Marlee,” I whimpered, losing control. I put the Mallory thing together. Of course she and
Carter couldn’t go by their real names while they were hiding right under the king’s nose.
    “I’ll be right back, America. Hold tight.” She scurried away, but I felt a great relief knowing
she would be with me.
    Anne absorbed the shock of Marlee’s presence in stride, and I watched as she pulled out a
needle and thread from the medical kit. I took comfort in the fact that she sewed almost all
my clothes. My arm shouldn’t be a problem.
    With incredible speed, Marlee was back with a pitcher of steaming water, an armful of
towels, and a bottle of amber liquid. She set the pitcher and towels on top of the dresser,
unscrewing the bottle as she came over.
    “For the pain.” She lifted my head so I could drink, and I obeyed.
    The stuff in the bottle was a new kind of burning, and I coughed my way through
swallowing it. She urged me to take another sip, and I did, hating it the whole time.
    “I’m so glad you’re here,” I whispered.
    “I’m always here for you, America. You know that.” She smiled; and for the first time in
our friendship, she seemed older than me, so calm and sure. “What in the world were you
doing?”
    I made a face. “It seemed like a good idea.”
    Her eyes became sympathetic. “America, you are full of nothing but bad ideas. Great
intentions but awful ideas.”
    She was right, of course, and I should have known better by now. But having her here,
even to tell me how dumb I’d been, made the whole thing less awful.
    “How soundproof are these walls?” Anne asked.
    “Pretty good,” Aspen said. “Don’t hear too much this deep in the palace.”
    “Good,” she said. “Okay, I need everyone in the hall. Miss Marlee, I’m going to need some
space, but you can stay.”
    Marlee nodded. “I’ll keep out of your way, Anne.”
    Avery left first, with Aspen trailing close behind him, and Maxon was last. The look in his
eyes reminded me of the day I’d told him I’d gone hungry before: sad to know about it and
devastated that he couldn’t undo it.
    The door clicked shut, and Anne started working quickly. She’d already set up everything
she needed and held out her hand to Marlee for the bottle.
    “Gulp it,” she ordered, lifting my head.
    I braced myself. I had to come off the lip of the bottle and go back to it several times
because of the coughing, but I managed to get a good amount of it down. Or at least it was
good enough for Anne.
    “Hold this,” she said, passing me a small towel. “Bite down on it when things hurt.”
    I nodded.
    “The stitches won’t hurt like the cleaning will. I can see dirt from here, so I’m going to
have to be thorough.” She sighed, looking again at the wound. “You’ll have a scar, but I’m
going to make it as small as I can. We’ll put loose sleeves on your dresses for a few weeks to
cover it while you heal. No one will know. And seeing as you were with the prince, I won’t ask
questions. Whatever you did, I’ll trust it was something important.”
    “I think so,” I said, not really sure anymore.
    She got a towel wet and held it inches away from the gash. “Ready?”
    I nodded.
    I bit into the towel, hoping it would muffle the screams. I was sure that everyone in the
hall could hear, but no one else probably would. It felt as if Anne was poking every nerve in
my arm, and Marlee crawled on top of me to keep me from writhing.
    “It’ll be over soon, America,” she promised. “Think of something happy. Think about your
family.”
    I tried. I fought to put May’s laugh or my dad’s knowing smile in the front of my thoughts,
but they wouldn’t stay. I could only catch them long enough to feel them slip away under a
new wave of pain.
    How in the world did Marlee make it through her caning alive?
    Once my wound was clean, Anne started sewing me up. She was right: the stitches didn’t
hurt as much. I couldn’t tell if it was because it was actually less painful or if the liquor they’d
given me was finally kicking in. It did seem like the edges of the room weren’t quite as sharp
anymore.
    Then people were back, talking about things, about me. Who should stay, who should go,
what we would say in the morning . . . so many details that I couldn’t contribute to.
    In the end, it was Maxon who scooped me up to return me to my room. It took some
effort to hold my head upright, but it made it easier to hear him.
    “How are you feeling?”
    “Your eyes look like chocolate,” I mumbled.
    He smiled. “And yours look like the morning sky.”
    “Can I have water?”
    “Yes. Lots,” he promised. “Let’s get her upstairs,” he said to someone else. And I fell asleep
to the rocking of his steps.
CHAPTER 15

I WOKE WITH A HEADACHE. I moaned as I rubbed my temple, then yelped when the action sent a
sharp pain across my arm.
    “Here,” Mary said, coming to sit on the edge of my bed. She held out two pills and a glass
of water.
    I slowly pushed myself up to take her offering, my head throbbing through all of it. “What
time is it?”
    “Nearly eleven,” Mary said. “We sent word that you weren’t feeling well and wouldn’t be at
breakfast. If we hurry, we could probably get you ready for lunch with the other Elite.”
    The thought of rushing or even eating didn’t sound appealing, but I thought it was wisest
to get back into a normal routine. It was becoming clear just how much we’d risked last night,
and I didn’t want to give anyone a reason to suspect anything at all had happened.
    I gave Mary a nod, and we both stood. My legs weren’t quite as reliable as I’d have liked,
but I moved toward the bathroom anyway. Anne was just outside the door, cleaning, as Lucy
sat in a wide chair sewing sleeves onto a dress that had probably been designed for simple
straps.
    She looked up from her handiwork. “Are you all right, miss? You gave us quite a scare.”
    “I’m sorry. I think I’m as good as I can be.”
    She smiled at me. “We’re ready to do what we can to help you, miss. You only need to
ask.”
    I wasn’t completely sure what she was offering, but I would take her up on any help that
might get me through the next few days.
    “Oh, Officer Leger stopped by, as well as the prince. They both hoped you would let them
know how you were feeling once you were up to it.”
    I nodded. “After lunch, I’ll take care of that.”
    With no warning, my arm was in someone’s hands. Anne was looking closely at the
wound, gingerly peeking under the bandages to check my progress.
    “It doesn’t look infected. As long as we keep it clean, I think it will heal nicely. I wish I
could have done something better. I know it’ll leave a mark,” she lamented.
    “Don’t worry. The best people all have some kind of scar.” I thought of Marlee’s hands and
Maxon’s back. They both held permanent marks of their bravery. I was honored to join them.
    “Lady America, your bath is ready,” Mary said from around the bathroom door.
    I took in her face, then Lucy’s, then Anne’s. I’d always been close to my maids, had always
trusted them. But something changed last night. It was the first time those bonds were
tested; and in the light of day, they were still there, strong and holding.
    I wasn’t sure there was a way to prove that I was as loyal to them as they were to me. But I
hoped an opportunity would show itself.

If I focused, I could lift my fork to my mouth without grimacing. It took an extraordinary
amount of effort, to the point where I started sweating in the middle of the meal. I decided to
stick to nibbling on bread. I didn’t need my right arm to hold that.
    Kriss asked how my headache was—which I guessed was the story circulating—and I told
her I was fine now, though my head and arm were impossible to ignore. That was the extent
of the questioning, and it looked as if no one had guessed that anything was out of the
ordinary.
    As I chewed a bite of bread, I debated how well the other girls would have done if they had
gone in my place last night. I decided the only person who would have fared better was
Celeste. Without a doubt, she’d have found a way to fight back, and I was a little jealous for a
minute that I wasn’t more like her.
    Once our trays were carted out of the Women’s Room, Silvia came in and asked for our
attention.
    “It’s time for you ladies to shine again. In a week, we’ll be having a small tea party, and
you all, of course, are invited!” I sighed to myself, worried about who we were meant to
entertain this time. “You won’t be in charge of any preparations for this particular party, but
you must be on your best behavior, because this will be filmed for the public.”
    I perked up a bit. I could handle that.
    “You will each invite two people to be your personal guests at this tea party, and that will
be your only responsibility. Choose wisely, and let me know your two contacts by Friday.”
    She walked away, leaving us all mentally scrambling. This was a test, and we knew it. Who
in the room had the most impressive connections, the most valuable ones?
    Maybe I was being paranoid, but it felt as if this task specifically targeted me. The king
must be searching for ways to remind everyone I was useless.
    “Who are you picking, Celeste?” Kriss asked.
    She shrugged. “Not sure yet. But I promise they’ll be spectacular.”
    If I had Celeste’s list of friends at my disposal, I wouldn’t be nervous either. Who was I
going to invite? My mom?
    Celeste turned to me, her voice warm. “Who do you think you’ll bring, America?”
    I tried to hide my shock. Even though we’d had a little breakthrough in the library, this
was the first time she’d addressed me the same way she would a friend. I cleared my throat.
“I have no idea. I’m not sure I know anyone who would be appropriate to invite. It might be
better if I bring no one.” I probably shouldn’t have been so open about how disadvantaged I
was, but it wasn’t as if the others weren’t aware.
    “Well, if you really can’t find anyone, let me know,” Celeste said. “I’m positive I have more
than two friends who would like to visit the palace, and I could make sure you at least have
an idea of who they are. If you want to, that is.”
    I stared at her, tempted to ask her what the catch was; but, looking into her eyes, I didn’t
think there was one. Then I was sure of it when she winked at me with the eye that Elise and
Kriss couldn’t see. Celeste, the consummate fighter, was pulling for me.
    “Thank you,” I said, feeling truly humbled.
    She shrugged. “No problem. If we’re going to have a party, might as well make it a good
one.” She leaned back in her chair, smiling to herself, and I was sure she was picturing this
event as her last hurrah. Part of me wanted to tell her not to give up, but I couldn’t. Only one
of us could have Maxon in the end.

By the afternoon, I had the rough outline of a plan, but it was dependent upon one big thing:
I’d have to get Maxon’s help.
    I was sure we would find each other before the end of the day, so I didn’t let myself worry
about it too much. For the time being, I needed to rest again, so I headed back up to my room.
   Anne was there, waiting with more pills and water. I couldn’t believe how calm she was
about it all.
   “I owe you one,” I said, downing the medicine.
   “No,” Anne protested.
   “Yes! Things would have been a lot different last night if you hadn’t been there.”
   She gently took the glass from me. “I’m just glad you’re okay.”
   She started walking to the bathroom to dispose of the water, and I followed her. “Isn’t
there anything I could do for you? Anything at all?”
   She stood there at the counter, something clearly on her mind.
   “Really, Anne. It would make me so happy.”
   She sighed. “Well, there’s one thing. . . .”
   “Please tell me.”
   Anne raised her eyes from the sink. “But you couldn’t let it slip to anyone. Mary and Lucy
would never let me live it down.”
   I creased my forehead. “What do you mean?”
   “It’s . . . it’s very personal.” She started fidgeting with her hands, something she never did,
and I knew this was important to her.
   “Okay, come talk to me about it,” I encouraged, wrapping my good arm around her
shoulder and ushering her to the table to sit with me.
   She crossed her ankles and put her hands in her lap. “See, it’s just that you get along with
him so well. He seems to think so highly of you.”
   “You mean Maxon?”
   “No,” she whispered, a wild blush filling her cheeks.
   “I don’t understand.”
   She took a deep breath. “Officer Leger.”
   “Ooooh,” I said, more shocked than I could express.
   “You think it’s hopeless, don’t you?”
   “Not hopeless,” I insisted. I just didn’t know how to tell the person who’d promised he’d
always fight for me that he should pursue her instead.
   “He’s always speaking so kindly of you. I know if you maybe mentioned me to him, or
could even find out if he’s got a girlfriend at home . . .”
   I sighed. “I can try, but I can’t promise anything.”
   “Oh, I know. Don’t worry. I’ve been telling myself it won’t happen, but I can’t stop
thinking about him.”
   I tilted my head. “I know how that is.”
   She put a hand in front of her. “And it’s not because he’s a Two. If he was an Eight, I’d
want someone like him.”
   “Lots of people would,” I said. And that was true. Celeste noticed him, Kriss said he was
funny, and even that Delilah woman sounded like she had a crush on him. That wasn’t even
taking into account all the girls back home who’d chased him. Hearing things like that didn’t
bother me so much anymore, not even from someone as close to me as Anne.
   It was one more thing that made me sure that my feelings for Aspen were gone. If I was
happy to suggest that someone else should take my place, then I really didn’t belong with
him.
Still, I wasn’t sure how to broach the subject.
I reached over the polished wood and put my hand on hers. “I’ll try, Anne. I swear.”
She smiled but bit her lip anxiously. “Just please don’t tell the others.”
I held her hand tighter. “You’ve always kept my secrets. I’ll always keep yours.”
CHAPTER 16

IT WAS ONLY A FEW hours later when Aspen knocked on my door. My maids merely curtsied
and exited, knowing without instruction that whatever we would say needed to be private.
     “How are you feeling?”
     “Not too bad,” I said. “My arm throbs a bit and I have a headache, but otherwise I’m fine.”
     He shook his head. “I shouldn’t have let you go.”
     I patted the space beside me on the bed. “Come sit.”
     He hesitated a bit. In my mind now, he was past suspicion. Maxon and my maids knew we
communicated, and he’d led us out of the palace last night. Where was the risk? He must
have thought the same thing, because he finally sat¸ choosing to keep a respectable distance
just in case.
     “I’m a part of this, Aspen. I couldn’t have stayed behind. And there’s nothing wrong with
me. I honestly owe that to you. You saved me last night.”
     “If I hadn’t been fast enough, or if Maxon hadn’t gotten you over that wall, you’d be a
prisoner somewhere right now. I almost let you die. I almost let Maxon die.” He shook his
head at the floor. “Do you know what would have happened to Avery and me if you two
hadn’t made it back? Do you know what—” He paused, seeming to hold back tears. “Do you
know what would have happened to me if we hadn’t found you?”
     Aspen looked at me, into me. The pain in his eyes was clear.
     “But you did. You found me, you protected me, and you got me help. You were amazing.” I
put my hand on Aspen’s back, running it up and down, trying to comfort him.
     “I’m just realizing, Mer, that no matter what happens . . . there will always be a string
tying you to me. I’ll never not worry about you. I’ll never not care about what you do. You’ll
always be something to me.”
     I took my hand and laced it through his arm, resting my head on his shoulder. “I know
what you mean.”
     We stayed like that for a while, and I guessed that maybe Aspen was doing the same thing
I was: replaying everything in his head. The way we avoided each other as children, the way
we couldn’t stop looking at each other when we were older, a thousand stolen moments in
the tree house—all the things that made us who we were.
     “America, I need to say something.” I lifted my head, and Aspen turned to face me,
holding me gently by my arms. “When I told you that I would always love you, I meant it. And
I . . . I . . .”
     He couldn’t manage to get the words out, and to be honest, I was grateful. Yes, I was tied
to him, but we weren’t that couple in the tree house anymore.
     He gave a weak laugh. “I guess I need some sleep. I can’t think straight.”
     “You and me both. And there’s so much to think about.”
     He nodded. “Look, Mer, we can’t do that again. Don’t tell Maxon I’ll help him with
something so risky, and don’t expect me to sneak you anywhere.”
     “I’m not sure it was worth it anyway. I can’t imagine Maxon would want to go again.”
     “Good.” He stood, then picked up my hand and kissed it. “My lady,” he said, his voice
teasing.
    I smiled and squeezed his hand a little. And he did the same back. As we held hands, my
grip tightening more every second, I realized that soon I’d need to let go. I’d need to really let
go.
    I looked into Aspen’s eyes, and I could feel the tears threatening to come. How do I say
good-bye to you?
    He ran his thumb over the back of my hand and placed it on my lap. He bent and kissed
my hair. “Take it easy. I’ll come check on you tomorrow.”

After a quick tug of my ear at dinner, Maxon knew I would be waiting for him tonight. I sat in
front of my mirror, wishing the minutes would move faster. Mary brushed the length of my
hair, calmly humming to herself. I vaguely recognized the tune as something I once played at
someone’s wedding. When I’d gotten chosen for the Selection, I’d wanted so badly to find my
way back to that life. I wanted a world full of the music I’d always loved.
    But, truly, that was never something I could have held on to. No matter which path I took
in life now, music might only be something I pulled out at parties to entertain a guest or a
way I relaxed on a weekend.
    I looked at myself in the mirror and realized I wasn’t bitter about that, not like I thought
I’d be. I’d miss it, but it was just a piece of who I was now, not everything I was. There were
possibilities in front of me no matter how the Selection unfolded.
    I really was more than my caste.
    Maxon’s light knock pulled me from my thoughts, and Mary answered the door.
    “Good evening,” Maxon said to Mary as he entered, and she curtsied in response.
    His eyes met mine briefly, and I wondered again if he could see how I felt about him, if it
was as real to him as it was to me.
    “Your Majesty,” Mary greeted quietly. She was about to leave the room when Maxon held
up a hand.
    “Forgive me, but could you tell me your name?”
    She stared at him for a moment, looked to me, and then focused on Maxon again. “I’m
Mary, Your Majesty.”
    “Mary. And Anne, we met last night.” He gave her a small bow of his head. “And you?”
    “Lucy.” Her voice was small, but I could sense her joy in being acknowledged.
    “Excellent. Anne, Mary, and Lucy. Lovely to properly meet you. I’m sure Anne has filled
you both in on last night so you can serve Lady America the best way possible. I want to
thank you for your dedication and discretion.”
    His eyes fell on each of them in turn. “I realize I’ve put you in a compromising position,
and if anyone ever raises questions about what happened, feel free to send them directly to
me. It was my decision, and you shouldn’t be held responsible for any consequences that
follow because of that.”
    “Thank you, Your Majesty,” Lucy said.
    I’d always sensed that my maids had a deep devotion to Maxon, but tonight I felt like it
went beyond the typical obligation. It seemed to me in the past as if the highest level of
loyalty was to the king, but now I wondered if that was true. More and more, I saw little
things that made me think people preferred his son.
    Maybe I wasn’t the only one who saw King Clarkson’s methods as barbaric, his way of
thinking cruel. Maybe the rebels weren’t the only ones ready for Maxon. Perhaps there were
others out there who were looking for more.
     My maids curtsied and left, leaving Maxon standing beside me.
     “What was that about? Learning their names, I mean?”
     He sighed. “Last night when Officer Leger said Anne’s name and I didn’t know who he
meant . . . it was embarrassing. Shouldn’t I know the people who tend to you better than
some random guard?”
     He’s not that random. “To be fair, the maids all gossip about the guards. It wouldn’t
surprise me if the guards did the same.”
     “Still. They’re with you every day. I should have known their names months ago.”
     I smiled at his reasoning and went to stand, though he looked uneasy about me moving at
all.
     “I’m fine, Maxon,” I insisted, taking his outstretched hand.
     “You were shot last night, if I remember correctly. You can’t blame me for worrying.”
     “It wasn’t like a real bullet wound. It only cut me.”
     “All the same, I won’t quickly forget the sound of your muffled screams as Anne sewed
you back together. Come, you should be resting.”
     Maxon ushered me to the bed, and I crawled in. He tucked me under the covers before
lying down on top of them himself, facing me. I waited for him to talk about everything that
had happened or to warn me of the coming fallout. But he didn’t say anything. He lay there,
brushing my hair back with his fingers, sometimes letting the tips linger on my cheek.
     It felt as if we were the whole world just then.
     “If something had happened—”
     “But it didn’t.”
     Maxon rolled his eyes, his voice getting serious. “It most certainly did! You came home
bleeding. We nearly lost you in the streets.”
     “Look, I’m not upset with the choice I made,” I said, trying to calm him. “I wanted to go, to
hear for myself. Besides, it’s not as if I could have let you go without me.”
     “I can’t believe how unprepared we were, going out in a palace truck without more guards.
And there are rebels just walking the streets. Since when are they not hiding? Where are they
getting these guns? I feel clueless, helpless. I’m losing the country I love a little every day. I
nearly lost you, and I—”
     Maxon stopped himself, his frustration fading into something new. He moved his hand
back to my cheek. “Last night, you said something . . . about love.”
     I looked down. “I remember.” I tried to contain my blush.
     “It’s funny how you can think you’ve said something when you never really did.”
     I giggled, feeling that the words were coming in his very next breath.
     “It’s also funny how you can think you’ve heard something when you didn’t either,” he
said instead.
     All the humor vanished from the moment. “I know what you mean.” I swallowed and
watched as his hand moved from my cheek to lace his fingers through mine, knowing that he
and I were both watching them. “Maybe, for some people, it would be hard to confess that.
Like, if they worried they might not make it to the end.”
     He sighed. “Or it would be hard to say if you worried that someone might not want to
make it to the end . . . maybe never quite gave up on someone else.”
     I shook my head. “That’s not . . .”
   “Okay.”
   For everything we’d said in the safe room, for everything we’d confessed to each other, for
everything that had firmly settled in my heart, these small words were the most frightening
things to pass between us. Because once they were out there, we could never take them back.
   I didn’t completely understand his reasons for hesitating, but I knew mine. If he ended up
with Kriss after I’d put my heart out there, I would be upset with him, but I would hate
myself. It was a risk I was too frightened to take.
   The silence was making me uneasy, and when it became too much, I spoke.
   “Maybe we could talk about this again when I’m feeling better?”
   He sighed. “Of course. Completely thoughtless of me.”
   “No, no. There’s just something else I wanted to ask you about.” There were bigger things
than us to consider right now.
   “Go ahead.”
   “I had a thought about my guests for the upcoming tea party, but I would need your
approval.”
   He looked at me, confused.
   “And I want you to know everything I would intend to discuss with them. We might be
breaking several laws, so I won’t do it if you say not to.”
   Intrigued, Maxon propped himself up on one arm to listen. “Tell me everything.”
CHAPTER 17

THE BACKDROP FOR OUR PHOTOS was plain and light blue. My maids put together a lovely dress
for me, with little off-the-shoulder cuffs that just covered my scar. For now, my days of
strapless gowns were gone.
    Though I looked pretty good, I was completely overshadowed by Nicoletta, and even
Georgia was dazzling in her gown.
    “Lady America,” the woman next to the camera called. “We remember Princess Nicoletta
from when the women of the Italian royal family came to visit the palace, but who is your
other guest?”
    “This is Georgia, a dear friend of mine,” I replied sweetly. “One of the things that I’ve
learned from the Selection so far is that moving forward means joining your life before
coming to the palace with the future that lies in front of you. I’m hoping to make another
step in joining those two worlds today.”
    Some of those standing around let out satisfied noises as the cameras continued to
capture the three of us.
    “Excellent, ladies,” the photographer said. “You can go enjoy the party. We’ll be taking
some candid shots later.”
    “Sounds fun,” I answered, motioning for my guests to come with me.
    Maxon had made it clear that of all days, today was one when I really needed to be on. I
hoped to be the lead example of what an Elite should be, but it was hard for me to try and be
so perfect.
    “Tone it down, America, or rainbows are going to shoot out of your eyes.” I loved that even
though our friendship was brief, Georgia could see right through my act.
    I laughed, and Nicoletta joined in. “She’s right. You do seem a bit perky.”
    I sighed with a smile. “Sorry. Today is a high-stakes kind of day.”
    Georgia put an arm on my shoulder as we walked deeper into the room. “After everything
you and Maxon have been through, I highly doubt he’ll send you home over a tea party.”
    “That’s not exactly what I mean. But we’ll have to talk about it later.” I turned to face
them. “Right now, it would be a huge help to me if we could mingle. Once things settle down,
we need to have a pretty serious discussion.”
    Nicoletta looked over at Georgia, then back to me. “What kind of friend are you
introducing me to here?”
    “A valuable one. I swear. I’ll explain later.”
    For their part, Georgia and Nicoletta made me shine. As a princess, Nicoletta was quite
possibly the best guest in the room, and I saw in Kriss’s eyes that she wished she had thought
of that. Of course, she didn’t have a direct line to Italian royalty like I did. Nicoletta herself
had given me a phone number to contact her if I ever needed to.
    No one knew who Georgia was, but when they’d heard my line—the one Maxon had
specifically fed to me—about joining my past and my future, they thought that was a
spectacular idea as well.
    Elise’s choices were predictable. Powerful but predictable. Two very distant cousins from
New Asia representing her ties to the leaders of the nation paraded next to her in their
traditional dresses. Kriss had chosen a professor from the college her father worked at and
her mother. I was dreading my family hearing about that. When Mom or May realized they
had a chance to be here, I was sure to get a very disappointed letter from them.
    Celeste, true to her word, brought full-fledged celebrities. Tessa Tamble—who had
allegedly given a show at Celeste’s last birthday party—was there in a very short but
glamorous dress. Celeste’s other guest was Kirstie Summer, another musician who was
mostly known for her outlandish concerts, and her outfit was more like a costume. My guess
was that it was either something she usually performed in or an experiment in painted
leather. Either way, I was surprised she got through the door, both because of the way she
was dressed and the fact that if you passed within a foot of her, you could smell the alcohol
radiating off her.
    “Nicoletta,” Queen Amberly said, approaching us. “How wonderful to see you again.”
    They exchanged kisses on both cheeks before Nicoletta spoke. “The joy is all mine. I was
elated when I received America’s invitation. We all had such a wonderful time on our last
visit.”
    “I’m glad to hear that,” the queen commented. “I’m afraid it’s going to be a bit calmer
today.”
    “I don’t know,” Nicoletta countered, pointing over to where Kirstie and Tessa were
standing in a corner and talking loudly. “I’m betting those two will send me home with at
least one story.”
    We all laughed, though I could see a little anxiety in the queen’s eyes. “I suppose I should
go introduce myself.”
    “Always the picture of bravery,” I joked.
    She smiled. “Please, relax and enjoy yourselves. I hope you get to meet some new
acquaintances but, honestly, just take some time together with your friends.”
    I nodded, and Queen Amberly left to meet Celeste’s guests. Tessa was looking fine, but
Kirstie appeared to be picking up and smelling every finger sandwich on a nearby table. I
made a mental note not to eat anything near where she’d been standing.
    I surveyed the room. Everyone seemed busy eating or talking, so I decided now was as
good a time as any.
    “Follow me,” I said, heading to a small table in the back. We sat, and a maid brought us
tea. Once we were alone, I dived in, hoping this would go smoothly.
    “Georgia, first, I haven’t had a chance to apologize about Micah.”
    She was shaking her head even as I spoke. “He always wanted to be a hero. We all accept
that things might . . . end like that. But I think he was proud.”
    “I’m still really sorry. Is there anything we can do?”
    “No. Everything’s taken care of. Trust me, he wouldn’t have chosen a different end,” she
insisted.
    I thought of the mouselike boy in the corner of the room that night. He willingly ran out
into the fray for me, for all of us. Bravery hides in amazing places.
    I turned back to the matter at hand. “Well, Georgia, as you can see, Nicoletta is the
princess of Italy. She visited with us a few weeks ago.” I looked between them. “At that time
she made it clear that Italy would like to be an ally to Illéa if certain things changed.”
    “America!” Nicoletta hissed.
    I held up a hand. “Trust me. Georgia here is a friend, but I don’t know her from Carolina.
She’s one of the leaders of the Northern rebels.”
    Nicoletta sat up in her seat. Georgia gave her a timid nod, confirming what I’d said.
    “She came to our aid recently. And lost someone close to her in the process,” I explained.
    Nicoletta placed her hand on Georgia’s. “I’m sorry.” Then she turned to me, curious as to
how all this tied together.
    “What we say needs to stay among us, but I thought we might be able to talk about some
things that would benefit everyone here,” I explained.
    “Are you trying to overthrow the king?” Nicoletta asked.
    “No,” Georgia assured her. “We’re hoping to align ourselves with Maxon’s reign, and work
toward eliminating the castes. Maybe within his lifetime. He seems to have more compassion
for his people.”
    “He does,” I added.
    “Then why do you attack the palace? And all those people?” Nicoletta accused sharply.
    I shook my head. “They’re not like the Southern rebels. They don’t kill people. They
sometimes deliver justice that they see as fit—”
    “We’ve gotten unwed mothers out of jail, things like that,” Georgia interjected.
    “They have broken into the palace, but never with the intent to kill,” I added.
    Nicoletta sighed. “I’m not so bothered by that, but I’m not sure why you need me to know
them.”
    “Neither am I,” Georgia confessed.
    I took a breath. “The Southern rebels are getting more and more aggressive. In the last
few months alone, their attacks have increased, not just at the palace but across the country.
They’re merciless. I worry, as does Maxon, that they’re very close to making a move we won’t
be able to recover from. Their idea of killing their way down the Elite’s castes is pretty drastic,
and we’re all afraid those attacks are going to escalate.”
    “They already have,” Georgia said, more to me than to Nicoletta. “When you invited me
here, I was happy if only to be able to give you more news. The Southern rebels have moved
to the Threes.”
    I placed a hand over my mouth, shocked that they were progressing so quickly. “Are you
sure?”
    “Positive,” Georgia confirmed. “The numbers shifted yesterday.”
    After a moment of quiet worry, Nicoletta spoke. “Why are they doing this?”
    Georgia turned to her. “To scare the Elite into leaving, to scare the royal family in general.
It seems like they think that if they can stop the Selection from finishing and isolate Maxon,
they’ll only have to get rid of him in order to take over.”
    “And that’s the real worry. If they come to power, there’s nothing for Maxon to offer you
as king. The Southern rebels would only oppress people further.”
    “So what do you propose?” Nicoletta asked.
    I tried to walk lightly into the criminal territory in front of me. “Georgia and the other
Northerners have a better opportunity to stop the Southern rebels than any of us in the
palace. They can see their moves more easily and have had chances to confront them . . . but
they’re untrained and unarmed.”
    They both waited, not seeing what I was implying.
    I lowered my voice. “Maxon can’t siphon money from the palace to help them buy
weapons.”
    “I see,” Nicoletta finally said.
    “It would be under the full understanding that these weapons would only be used to stop
the Southerners. Never against an officer of any government-issued position,” I said, looking
at Georgia.
    “That wouldn’t be a problem.” I saw in her eyes how much she meant that, and I already
knew it in my own heart. If she’d wanted to, she could have taken me out when she found me
in the woods or chosen not to come running into the alley after us. But that was never her
goal.
    Nicoletta was strumming her fingers across her lips, thinking. I knew we were asking a
lot, but I wasn’t sure how to move forward otherwise.
    “If anyone found out . . . ,” she said.
    “I know. I’ve thought about that.” If the king ever knew, a caning wouldn’t be enough
where I was concerned.
    “If we could make sure there isn’t a trail.” Nicoletta kept fidgeting her fingers near her
mouth.
    “It would need to be cash, at least. That makes it harder,” Georgia offered.
    Nicoletta nodded and dropped her hand to the table. “I said if I could do anything for you,
I would. We could use a strong friend, and if your country is lost, I fear we would only gain
another enemy.”
    I gave her a sad smile.
    She turned to Georgia. “I can get the cash today, but it would need to be converted.”
    Georgia smiled. “We have means.”
    Over her shoulder I saw a photographer approaching. I picked up my teacup and
whispered, “Camera.”
    “And I’ve always thought America was a lady. I think sometimes we miss those traits
because we see Fives as performers and Sixes as housekeepers. But look at Queen Amberly.
She’s so much more than a Four,” Georgia said kindly. Nicoletta and I both nodded.
    “She’s an incredible woman. It’s been a privilege to live with her,” I shared.
    “Maybe you’ll get to stay with her!” Nicoletta said with a wink.
    “Smile, ladies!” the photographer instructed, and we all showed our brightest faces,
hoping to cover our dangerous secret.
CHAPTER 18

THE DAY AFTER NICOLETTA AND Georgia left, I caught myself looking over my shoulder a lot. I
was sure someone knew what I’d said, what I’d handed over to the rebels in a brief afternoon.
I kept reminding myself that if anyone had overheard, I certainly would have been arrested
by now. Seeing as I was still enjoying a wonderful breakfast with the other Elite and the royal
family, I had to believe that everything was fine. Besides, Maxon would defend me if he had
to.
    After breakfast, I went back to my room to touch up my makeup. While I was in the
bathroom, sweeping on another layer of lipstick, a knock sounded at the door. It was just
Lucy and me, and she went to see who it was while I finished up. A minute later she popped
her head around the corner.
    “It’s Prince Maxon,” she whispered.
    I whipped my head around. “He’s here?”
    She nodded, beaming. “He remembered my name.”
    “Of course he did,” I replied with a smile. I put everything down and ran my fingers
through my hair. “Lead me out, then leave quietly.”
    “As you wish, miss.”
    Maxon was standing tentatively by the door, uncharacteristically waiting for an invitation
to enter. He held a small, thin box, and he drummed his fingers against it, fidgeting. “Sorry to
interrupt. I was wondering if I could have a moment.”
    “Of course,” I said, walking over. “Please come in.” Maxon and I perched on the edge of
my bed.
    “I wanted to see you first,” he said, getting situated. “I wanted to explain before the others
came in bragging.”
    Explain? For some reason his words put me on edge. If the others were bragging, I was
about to be excluded from something.
    “What do you mean?” I realized I was biting my freshly glossed lip.
    Maxon passed the box over to me. “I’ll clarify, I promise. But first, this is for you.”
    I took the box and unhooked a small button in the front so I could open it. I think I
inhaled every millimeter of air in the room.
    Resting inside the box were a breathtaking set of earrings and matching bracelet. They
coordinated beautifully, with blue and green gems woven into a subtle floral design.
    “Maxon, I love it, but I can’t possibly take this. It’s too . . . too . . .”
    “On the contrary, you must take them. It’s a gift, and it’s tradition that you wear them in
the Convicting.”
    “The what?”
    He shook his head. “Silvia will explain all that; but the point is, it’s tradition for the prince
to present the Elite with jewelry and for them to wear the pieces to the ceremony. There will
be quite a few officials there, and you need to look your best. And unlike the things you’ve
been presented with so far, these are all real and yours to keep.”
    I smiled. Of course we wouldn’t have been given real jewelry to wear until now. I
wondered how many girls had taken things home, thinking that if they hadn’t gotten Maxon,
at least they got a few thousand in jewelry.
    “They’re wonderful, Maxon. Just my taste. Thank you.”
    Maxon raised a finger. “You’re welcome, and that’s part of what I wanted to discuss. I
chose the gifts for each of you personally and intended that they should all be equal.
However, you prefer to wear the necklace from your father, and I’m sure it would be a
comfort to you in the middle of something as big as the Convicting. So, while the others got
necklaces, you have a bracelet.”
    He reached over to my hand and lifted it. “And I see you’re attached to your little button,
and I’m glad you still like the bracelet I brought back from New Asia, but they really aren’t
appropriate. Try this on so we can see how it rests.”
    I took off Maxon’s bracelet and set it on the edge of my nightstand. But I took Aspen’s
button and set it in my jar with its single penny. It seemed like it should be there for now.
    I turned back and caught Maxon staring at the jar, something hard in his eyes. It
disappeared swiftly enough, and he went to removing the bracelet from the box. His fingers
tickled my skin, and when he moved away, I nearly gasped again at how beautiful his gift was.
    “It really is perfect, Maxon.”
    “I hoped you’d think so. But that is precisely why I needed to talk to you. I set out to
spend the same amount on all of you. I wanted to be fair.”
    I nodded. That sounded reasonable.
    “The problem with that being, your tastes are much simpler than the others. And you have
a bracelet as opposed to a necklace. I ended up spending half as much on you as the rest, and
I wanted you to know that before you saw what I gave them. And I wanted you to know that it
came from wanting to give you what I felt you would like the best, not because of your place
or anything like that.” Maxon’s face was so sincere.
    “Thank you, Maxon. I wouldn’t have had it any other way,” I said, placing a hand on his
arm.
    As always, he seemed so happy to be touched. “I suspected as much. Though thank you for
saying so. I was afraid I might hurt you.”
    “Not at all.”
    Maxon’s smile grew. “Of course, I still wanted to be fair, so I had a thought.” He reached
into his pocket and pulled out a thin envelope. “Perhaps you would like to send the difference
to your family.”
    I stared at the envelope. “Are you serious?”
    “Of course. I want to be impartial, and I thought this would be the best way to handle the
discrepancy. And I hoped it would make you happy.” He placed the envelope in my hands, and
I took it, still shocked.
    “You didn’t have to do that.”
    “I know. But sometimes it’s about what you want to do, not what you have to.”
    Our eyes met, and I realized that he did a lot for me out of simply wanting to. Giving me
pants when I wasn’t allowed to wear them, bringing me a bracelet from the other side of the
world . . .
    Surely he loved me. Right? Why wouldn’t he just say it?
    We’re alone, Maxon. If you say it, I’ll say it back.
    Nothing.
    “I don’t know how to thank you for this, Maxon.”
    He smiled. “Hearing you say it is nice.” He cleared his throat. “I’m always interested in
hearing how you feel.”
    Oh, no. Nope. I was not putting it out there first.
    “Well, I’m very grateful. As always.”
    Maxon sighed. “I’m happy you like it.” Unsatisfied, he took to watching the carpet. “I need
to go. I still have to deliver the gifts to the others.”
    We stood together, and I escorted him to the door. As he left, he turned and kissed my
hand. With a friendly nod of his head, he disappeared around the corner to visit the others.
    I walked back to the bed and looked again at my gifts. I couldn’t believe that something
this beautiful was mine to keep, forever. I vowed to myself that, even if I went home and all
the money ran out and my family was absolutely destitute, I would never sell these or give
them away, or the bracelet he’d gotten me in New Asia. I would hold on to them no matter
what.

“The Convicting is simple enough,” Silvia said to us the next afternoon as we followed her to
the Great Room. “It’s one of those things that sounds much more challenging than it is, but
above all it’s symbolic.
    “It will be a grand event. There will be several magistrates here, not to mention the
extended members of the royal family, and enough cameras to make your heads spin,” Silvia
barked over her shoulder.
    So far this was sounding anything but simple. We rounded the corner, and Silvia flung
open the doors to the Great Room. In the middle of the space was Queen Amberly herself,
giving instructions to men setting up rows of stadium seats. In another corner, someone was
debating which carpet to roll out, and two florists were discussing which blossoms would be
most appropriate. They apparently didn’t think the Christmas decorations should stay. So
much was happening, I almost forgot Christmas was coming at all.
    Toward the back of the room a stage was set up with stairs across the front of it, and three
massive thrones were centered on the platform. To our right were four small stages with lone
seats on them, looking beautiful but also very isolating. Those alone were enough to decorate
the room, and I couldn’t imagine how it would look once everything was in place.
    “Your Majesty,” Silvia said with a curtsy, and we all followed suit. The queen walked over
to us, her face lit up with a smile.
    “Hello, ladies,” she said. “Silvia, how far have you gotten?”
    “Not far at all, Majesty.”
    “Excellent. Ladies, let me enlighten you about your next task in the Selection process.”
She motioned for us to follow her inside the Great Room. “The Convicting is meant to be a
symbol of your submission to the law. One of you will become the new princess, and
someday queen. The law is how we live, and it will be your duty not only to live by it but to
uphold it. And so,” she said, stopping and facing us, “you will start with the Convicting.
    “A man who has committed a crime, most likely a theft, will be brought in. These are cases
that are worthy of a whipping, but these men will spend time in jail instead. And you will
send them there.”
    The queen smiled at our bewildered expressions. “I know it sounds harsh, but it’s not.
These men have each committed a crime, and instead of facing the difficulties of a physical
punishment, they’ll be paying their debts with time. You’ve seen firsthand how painful a
caning can be. Being whipped isn’t much better. You’re doing them a favor,” she said
encouragingly.
    I still didn’t feel good about it.
    Those who stole were penniless. Twos and Threes who broke laws paid their way out of
punishment with money. The poor paid their way in flesh or time. I remembered Jemmy,
Aspen’s younger brother, leaning over a block while men took a handful of food out of his
back in lashes. While I hated that, it was better than locking him away. The Legers needed
him to work, young as he was, and it seemed that once you got above a Five, people forgot
that.
    Silvia and Queen Amberly walked us through the ceremony over and over until our lines
were perfect. I tried to deliver mine with the grace that Elise or Kriss had, but they came out
sounding flat every time.
    I did not want to put a man in jail.
    When we were dismissed, the other girls headed to the door together, but I went to the
queen. She was finishing a conversation with Silvia. I should have used that time to come up
with something more eloquent. Instead, when Silvia walked away and the queen addressed
me, I just blurted it out.
    “Please don’t make me do this,” I pleaded.
    “I beg your pardon?”
    “I can submit to the law, I swear. It’s not that I’m trying to be difficult, but I can’t put a
man in jail. He didn’t do anything to me.”
    Her expression was kind as she reached to touch my face. “But he did, dear girl. If you
became the princess, you’d be the embodiment of the law. When someone breaks the
smallest rule, they stab you. The only way to keep from bleeding out is to take a stand against
those who have already harmed you so that others will not be so brazen.”
    “But I’m not the princess!” I implored. “No one’s hurting me.”
    She smiled and lowered her head to mine, whispering, “You’re not the princess today, but
it wouldn’t surprise me if that was a temporary issue.”
    Queen Amberly stepped back and winked.
    I sighed, getting desperate. “Bring me someone else. Not some petty thief who probably
only stole because they were hungry.” Her face stiffened. “I’m not suggesting it’s okay to
steal. I know it’s not. But bring me someone who did something really bad. Bring me the
person who killed the guard that got Maxon and me into a safe room the last time the rebels
came. That person should be locked up forever. And I’ll say that happily. But I can’t do this to
some hungry Seven. I can’t.”
    I could see she wanted to be gentle with me, but I could also see she wouldn’t budge on
this. “Allow me to be very blunt with you, Lady America. Of all the girls, you need to do this
the most. People have seen you run to stop a caning, suggest undoing the castes on national
television, and encourage people to fight when their lives are in serious danger.” Her kind
face was serious. “I’m not saying those were bad things, but they have given most people the
impression that you run wild.”
    I fidgeted with my hands, knowing this was going to end with me doing the Convicting no
matter what I said.
    “If you want to stay, if you care about Maxon”—she paused, giving me a moment to
consider—“then you need to do this. You need to show you have the ability to be obedient.”
    “I do. I just don’t want to put someone in jail. That’s not a princess’s job. Magistrates do
that.”
    Queen Amberly patted my shoulder. “You can do it. And you will. If you want Maxon at
all, you need to be perfect. I’m sure you understand that there’s opposition where you’re
concerned.”
    I nodded.
    “Then do it.”
    She walked away, leaving me alone in the Great Room. I went up to my seat, practically a
throne itself, and mumbled the lines again. I tried to tell myself that it wasn’t a big deal.
People broke laws and went to jail all the time. It was one person out of thousands. And I
needed to be perfect.
    Perfect was my only option.
CHAPTER 19

THE DAY OF THE CONVICTING I was a bundle of nerves. I was afraid I’d trip, or forget what to
say. Even worse, I was afraid I’d fail. The one thing I didn’t have to worry about was my
clothes. My maids had to confer with the head dresser to make something suitable for me,
though I wouldn’t use a word as plain as suitable to describe it.
    Following again on tradition, the dresses were all white and gold. Mine had a high waist
and no strap on the left but did have a small, off-the-shoulder strap on the right, covering my
scar and looking really lovely at the same time. The top was snug, but the skirt was billowing,
kissing the floor with scallops of golden lace. It came together with pleats in the back that fell
behind me in a short train. When I looked at myself in the mirror, it was the first time I
actually thought I looked like a princess.
    Anne grabbed the olive branch I was meant to carry and situated it in my arm. We were
supposed to place the branches at the foot of the king as a sign of peace toward our leader and
our willingness to yield to the law.
    “You look beautiful, miss,” Lucy said. I couldn’t help but notice how calm and confident
she seemed lately. I smiled.
    “Thank you. I wish you were all going to be there,” I said.
    “Me, too.” Mary sighed.
    Ever proper, Anne turned the focus back in my direction. “Don’t you worry, miss; you’ll do
perfectly. And we’ll be watching with the other maids.”
    “You will?” That was encouraging, even though they wouldn’t be downstairs.
    “We wouldn’t miss it,” Lucy assured me.
    A sharp knocking snapped us from our conversation. Mary opened the door, and I was
happy to see it was Aspen.
    “I’m here to escort you to the Convicting, Lady America,” he said.
    Lucy piped up. “What do you think of our handiwork, Officer Leger?”
    He smiled slyly. “You’ve outdone yourselves.”
    Lucy giggled, and Anne quietly shushed her as she made final adjustments to my hair.
Now that I knew about Anne’s feelings for Aspen, it was obvious how perfect she tried to be
in front of him.
    I took a deep breath, remembering the masses waiting for me downstairs.
    “Ready?” he asked.
    I nodded, readjusted my branch, and went to the door, peeking back just once to see my
maids’ happy faces. I looped my arm through Aspen’s and headed with him down the hall.
    “How have you been?” I asked casually.
    “I can’t believe you’re going through with this,” he shot back.
    I swallowed, immediately nervous again. “I don’t have a choice.”
    “You always have a choice, Mer.”
    “Aspen, you know I don’t like this. But in the end, it’s only one person. And he’s guilty.”
    “Just like the rebel sympathizers that the king demoted a caste. Just like Marlee and
Carter.” I didn’t have to look up to see how disgusted he was.
    “That was different,” I mumbled, not sounding convincing at all.
    Aspen stopped dead in his tracks and forced me to look at him. “It’s never different with
him.”
    His tone was so serious. Aspen knew more than most people did, because he’d stood
guard during meetings or delivered orders himself. He was holding a secret right now.
    “Are they thieves at all?” I asked quietly as we continued to move.
    “Yes, but nothing deserving the years of jail they’ll receive today. And it’s going to be a
pretty loud message to their friends.”
    “What do you mean?”
    “They’re people who’ve gotten in his way, Mer. Rebel sympathizers, men a bit too
outspoken about what a tyrant he is. This is being broadcast everywhere. The people they’ve
tried to sway will see this, will warn others about what happens to those who attempt to go
against the king. This is deliberate.”
    I whipped my arm from his, hissing my words at him. “You’ve been here almost as long as
I have. In all that time, did you ever not deliver one of the sentences you were ordered to?”
    He considered. “No, but—”
    “Then don’t judge me. If he’s not above putting his enemies in prison without real cause,
what do you think he’ll do to me? He hates me!”
    Aspen’s eyes were pleading. “Mer, I know it’s scary, but you’ve—”
    I put up my hand. “Do your job. Take me downstairs.”
    He swallowed once, turned forward, and put his arm out for me. I gripped it, and we
walked on in silence.
    Halfway down the stairs, as the buzz of conversation started to reach us, he spoke up
again.
    “I always wondered if they’d change you.”
    I didn’t respond. What could I say anyway?
    In the grand foyer, the other girls were staring into the distance, quietly moving their lips
as they recited their lines. I detached myself from Aspen and moved to join them.
    Elise had talked about her dress so much, I felt as if I’d already seen it. Gold and cream
were woven together in a slim, sleeveless design, and her golden gloves looked dramatic. Her
gifts from Maxon were deep, dark gems, and they made her slick hair and dark eyes pop.
    Kriss once again managed to be the embodiment of all things royal, and it was like she
wasn’t even trying. Her dress was fitted through the waist and burst out like a flower
blossoming toward the ground. And Maxon’s necklace and earrings for her were iridescent,
gently rounded, and perfect. It did, for a moment, make me sad that mine were so simple.
    Celeste’s dress . . . well, it would certainly be unforgettable. Her neckline was plunging,
and it seemed a little inappropriate for the occasion. She caught me staring, and pushed her
lips together and shook her shoulders at me.
    I laughed once and put my hand to my forehead, feeling a little sick. I inhaled deeply,
trying to calm myself.
    Celeste met me halfway, swinging her branch with each step. “What’s wrong?”
    “Nothing. Just not feeling well, I guess.”
    “Do. Not. Puke,” she ordered. “Especially not on me.”
    “I won’t throw up,” I assured her.
    “Who threw up?” Kriss asked, joining the conversation; and Elise followed behind her.
    “No one,” I said. “I’m just tired or something.”
    “It won’t last too long,” Kriss reassured me.
    It’ll last forever, I thought. I looked at each of their faces. They’d come to my side just
now. Wouldn’t I have done the same for them? Maybe . . .
    “Do any of you actually feel good about doing this?” I asked.
    They all looked at one another or the floor, but no one answered.
    “Then let’s not do it,” I urged.
    “Not do it?” Kriss questioned. “America, it’s tradition. We have to.”
    “No we don’t. Not if we all decide not to.”
    “What would we do? Refuse to walk in there?” Celeste asked.
    “That’s one option,” I offered.
    “You want us to sit in there and do nothing?” Elise sounded appalled.
    “I hadn’t thought it through. I just know I don’t think this is a good idea.”
    I could see that Kriss was genuinely considering it.
    “It’s a trick!” Elise accused.
    “What?” How could she come to that conclusion?
    “She’s going last. If we all do nothing and then she follows through, she looks obedient
while the rest of us look like idiots.” Elise shook her branch at me as she spoke.
    “America?” Kriss looked at me, disappointment filling her eyes.
    “No, I swear; that’s not what I was going to do!”
    “Ladies!” We all turned toward Silvia’s correcting tone. “I understand that you’re nervous,
but that’s no reason to shout.”
    Her gaze hit each of us, and we all exchanged looks as they decided whether to go in on
this with me.
    “All right,” Silvia began. “Elise, you’ll be first, just as we practiced. Celeste and Kriss, you
will follow; and America, you’ll be last. One at a time, carry your branch up the red carpet and
place it at the feet of the king. Then come back and take your seat. The king will say a few
words, and the ceremony will start.”
    She stepped over to what looked like a small box on a stand and turned it around to show
a television monitor with a view of everything happening inside the Great Room. It was
magnificent. Red carpeting divided the room into the seats for the press and guests, and the
four seats delegated for us. In the back of the space, the thrones sat, waiting for the royal
family.
    As we watched, the side door to the Great Room opened, and the king, the queen, and
Maxon came in to applause and trumpeting fanfare. Once they were seated, a slower, more
dignified melody started playing.
    “There it is. Now, head high,” Silvia instructed. Elise gave me a pointed look and strode
around the corner.
    The music was dotted by the sound of hundreds of cameras taking her picture. It made for
a strange rhythm section. She did great, though, as we could all see on the monitor Silvia was
watching. Celeste followed, straightening her hair before she left. Kriss’s smile looked
absolutely genuine and natural as she paraded down the aisle.
    “America,” Silvia whispered. “Your turn.”
    I tried to wipe the worry off my face and focus on positive things, but I realized there
weren’t any. I was about to kill a part of myself by punishing someone beyond what I thought
was deserved and give the king something he wanted in a neat, short stroke.
    The cameras clicked, the bulbs flashed, and people whispered their praises to one another
as I walked quietly toward the royal family. I made eye contact with Maxon, who was the
picture of calm. Was that his years of discipline or true happiness coming through? His face
was reassuring, but I was certain he could see the anxiety in my gaze. I saw my open spot for
the olive branch and curtsied before placing my offering at the king’s feet, deliberately
looking at anything in the room other than him.
    As soon as I was in my place, the music came to a perfectly calculated stop. King Clarkson
walked forward, standing on the edge of his stage, the circle of branches at his feet.
    “Ladies and gentlemen of Illéa, today the final four beautiful young women of the
Selection come before us all to present themselves to the law. Our great laws are what hold
our nation together, the foundation for the peace we’ve so long enjoyed.”
    Peace? I thought. Are you kidding?
    “One of these young ladies will stand before you soon, no longer a commoner, but a
princess. And as a member of the royal family, it will be her job to hold on to what is right,
not for her own benefit, but for yours.”
    . . . and how am I doing that now?
    “Please join me in applauding their humility in their submission to the law and their
bravery in upholding it.”
    The king started clapping, and the room joined him. The applause continued as he stepped
away, and I glanced down the row of girls. The only face I could really see was Kriss’s. She
shrugged and gave me a half smile before facing forward again and raising herself to her full
height.
    A guard by the door trumpeted into the room. “We call into the presence of His Majesty
King Clarkson, Her Majesty Queen Amberly, and His Royal Highness Prince Maxon the
criminal Jacob Digger.”
    Slowly, no doubt embarrassed by the spectacle, Jacob walked into the Great Room. His
wrists were in handcuffs, and he flinched at the cameras’ lights and went skittishly to bow in
front of Elise. I couldn’t see her very well without leaning too far forward, so I turned slightly
and listened as she spoke the lines we all would in turn.
    “Jacob, what is your crime?” she asked. She projected her voice really well, much better
than usual.
    “Theft, my lady,” he answered meekly.
    “And how long is your sentence?”
    “Twelve years, my lady.”
    Slowly, not drawing attention to herself, Kriss looked my way. With hardly a change in her
expression, she questioned what was happening. I nodded.
    Small crimes of theft, we’d been told. If that was true, then this man would have been
beaten in his town square, or, if he had been put in prison, it would have been for two or
three years at the most. In two words, Jacob confirmed all my fears.
    Subtly, I turned my eyes toward the king. There was no mistaking his pleasure. Whoever
this man was, he wasn’t just some thief. The king was delighting in his downfall.
    Elise stood and walked down to Jacob, placing her hand on his shoulder. He hadn’t truly
looked her in the eye until that moment.
    “Go, faithful subject, and pay your debt to the king.” Her voice rang out in the quiet of the
room.
    Jacob nodded his head. He looked at the king, and I could see he wanted to do something.
He wanted to fight or make an accusation, but he didn’t. No doubt someone else would pay
for any mistakes he made today. Jacob stood and exited the room as the audience applauded.
    The next man had difficulty moving. As he turned to make his way down the carpet
toward Celeste, he doubled over and fell. A collective gasp came from the room, but before he
could garner too much sympathy, two guards came and walked him to Celeste. To her credit,
her voice wasn’t as sure as it usually was as she ordered the man to pay his debt.
    Kriss looked as steady as ever until her criminal got closer. He was younger, probably
around our age, and his steps were steady, almost determined. When he turned up the carpet
to Kriss, I saw a tattoo on his neck. It looked like a cross, though it seemed as if whoever had
done it messed up a bit.
    Kriss delivered her lines well. Anyone who didn’t know her wouldn’t be able to read the
hint of regret in her voice. The room applauded, and she sat back down, her smile only
slightly less bright than it usually was.
    The guard yelled out the name Adam Carver, and I realized it was my turn. Adam, Adam,
Adam. I needed to remember his name. Because I had to do this now, right? The other girls
had. Maxon might forgive me if I failed, and the king would never like me either way; but I
would certainly lose the queen, and that backed me into a corner. If I wanted a chance at all, I
needed to deliver.
    Adam was older, maybe my dad’s age, and there was something wrong with his leg. He
didn’t fall, but it took him so long to reach me that it made the whole thing that much worse.
I just wanted it to be done.
    As Adam knelt in front of me, I focused on the few lines I needed to deliver.
    “Adam, what is your crime?” I asked.
    “Theft, my lady.”
    “And how long is your sentence?”
    Adam cleared his throat. “Life,” he squeaked out.
    Around the room, murmurs began as people were sure they hadn’t heard that right.
    Though I hated to deviate from my lines, I too needed confirmation. “How long did you
say?”
    “Life, my lady.” It was apparent in Adam’s voice that he was on the verge of tears.
    I peeked over at Maxon. He looked uncomfortable. Wordlessly, I pleaded for help. His
eyes conveyed how sorry he was that he couldn’t guide me.
    As I was about to focus again on Adam, my eyes flickered to the king, who had quickly
shifted his weight. I watched him run his hand across his mouth in an effort to hide his
smile.
    He’d set me up.
    Perhaps he suspected I would hate this part of the Selection and planned to do what he
could to make me look disobedient. But even if I went through with it, what kind of person
was I to put a man in prison forever? No one would love me now.
    “Adam,” I said softly. He looked up at me, tears threatening to fall at any moment. I
noticed quickly that every whisper in the room ceased. “How much did you steal?”
    People were trying to hear, but it was impossible.
    He swallowed and darted his eyes toward the king. “Some clothes for my girls.”
    I spoke quickly. “But this isn’t about that, is it?”
   In a gesture so minute I almost missed it, Adam shook his head once.
   So I couldn’t do it. I couldn’t do it. But I had to do something.
   The idea hit me so quickly, and I was positive it was our only way out. I wasn’t sure if it
would gain Adam his freedom, and I tried not to think of how sad it would make me. It was
simply right, and I had to do it.
   I stood and made my way to Adam, touching him on his shoulder. He winced, waiting for
me to tell him he was going to prison.
   “Stand up,” I said.
   Adam looked at me, confusion in his eyes.
   “Please,” I said, and took one of his cuffed hands to pull him along.
   Adam walked with me up the aisle, to the raised area where the royal family sat. When we
got to the stairs, I turned to him and sighed.
   I took off one of the beautiful earrings that Maxon had given me, then the other. I placed
both in Adam’s hands; and he stood there, dumbstruck, as my beautiful bracelet followed.
And then—because, if I was truly going to do this, I wanted to give everything—I reached
behind my neck and unclasped my songbird necklace, the one my dad had given me. I hoped
he was watching and not hating me for giving his gift away. Once I dropped it into Adam’s
hand, I curled his fingers around the treasures, then stepped to the side so that he was
standing directly in front of King Clarkson.
   I pointed toward the thrones. “Go, faithful subject, and pay your debt to the king.”
   There were gasps and murmurs around the room, but I ignored them. All I could see was
the sour expression on the king’s face. If he wanted to play a game with my character, then I
was prepared to answer in turn.
   Adam slowly climbed the steps, and I could see both the joy and fear in his eyes. As he
approached the king, he fell to his knees and held out his hands, full of jewels.
   King Clarkson shot me a glance, letting me know this wouldn’t be the end of it, but then
reached out and took the jewelry out of Adam’s hands.
   The crowd erupted, but when I looked back, the other girls had mixed reactions on their
faces. Adam backed away from the king quickly, perhaps afraid he’d change his mind. My
hope was that, with so many cameras going and so many people writing articles about this,
someone would follow up and make sure he made it home. When Adam got back to my level,
he tried to hug me, even with the handcuffs on. He cried and blessed me, and went from the
room looking like the happiest soul on earth.
CHAPTER 20

THE ROY AL FAMILY EXITED OUT the side door, and the other Elite and I left the way we’d come as
the cameras and guests filmed and applauded.
    Silvia’s eyes when we came out the doorway were positively deadly. It looked like it was
taking every last bit of strength she had to keep from throttling me. She led us around the
corner to a small parlor.
    “In,” she ordered, as if anything more would push her past the brink. She shut the doors,
not bothering to join us.
    “Do you always have to be the center of attention?” Elise snapped.
    “I didn’t do anything except what I tried to ask you to do. You were the one who didn’t
believe me!”
    “You act like such a saint. They were criminals. We weren’t doing anything a magistrate
wouldn’t do; we just did it in pretty dresses.”
    “Elise, did you see those men? Some of them were sick. And the sentences for their crimes
were way too long,” I implored.
    “She’s right,” Kriss said. “Life for theft? Unless he carted the palace away, what could he
have possibly taken to deserve that?”
    “Nothing,” I vowed. “He took clothes for his family. Look, you guys are lucky. You were
born into better castes. If you’re in the lower ones, and you lose your main provider . . . things
don’t go well. I couldn’t send him to jail for life and at the same time sentence his family to
becoming Eights. I couldn’t.”
    “Where is your pride, America?” Elise begged. “Where is your sense of duty or honor?
You’re just a girl; you aren’t even the princess. And if you were, you wouldn’t be allowed to
make decisions like that. You are here to follow the king’s rules, and you have never done
that! Not even from the first night!”
    “Maybe the rules are wrong!” I screamed, at perhaps the worst time possible.
    The doors were flung open, and King Clarkson stormed in while Queen Amberly and
Maxon stood in the hall. He grabbed my arm, hard—thankfully not my injured one—and
dragged me out of the room.
    “Where are you taking me?” I asked, fear making my breath come out in short bursts.
    He didn’t answer.
    I looked over my shoulder at the girls as the king pulled me down the hall. Celeste
wrapped her arms around herself, and Elise reached for Kriss’s hand. For as upset as she was,
Elise didn’t seem happy to see me go.
    “Clarkson, don’t act in haste,” the queen urged quietly.
    We rounded a corner, and I was forced into a room. The queen and Maxon filed in behind
us as the king shoved me toward a small couch.
    “Sit,” he commanded unnecessarily. He paced the floor, a lion in a cage. When he stopped,
he faced Maxon.
    “You swore!” he bellowed. “You said she was under control. First the outburst on the
Report, then you nearly get yourself killed on the roof, and now this? It ends today, Maxon.”
    “Father, did you hear the cheers? People appreciate her sympathy. She’s your greatest
asset right now.”
    “I beg your pardon?” His voice was an iceberg, slow and deadly.
    Maxon paused a moment at the chill but continued. “When she suggested that people
defend themselves, the public responded positively. I daresay the reason more people aren’t
dead is because of her. And this? Father, I couldn’t put a man in jail for life over what was
supposed to be a petty crime. How can you expect that from someone who’s probably seen
more than her fair share of friends beaten for less? She’s refreshing. The majority of the
population is in the lower castes, and they relate to her.”
    The king shook his head and started walking again. “I let her stay because she kept you
alive. You are my most valuable asset, not her. If we lose you, we lose everything. And I don’t
just mean through death. If you aren’t committed to this life, if you lose your focus, this will
all fall apart.” He waved his arms at the wide room, letting the silence hang.
    “You’re being brainwashed,” the king accused. “You change a little every day. These girls,
this one more than the others, are all useless.”
    “Clarkson, perhaps—” He silenced the queen with a look, and whatever her opinion was
fell away.
    The king turned back to Maxon. “I have a proposition for you.”
    “I’m not interested,” he shot back.
    King Clarkson raised his arms in front of him, gesturing that he meant no harm. “Hear me
out.”
    Maxon sighed.
    “These girls have been disastrous. Even the Asian’s connections have done nothing for
me. The Two is too concerned with fame; and the other, well, she’s not entirely hopeless but
not good enough, if you ask me. This one,” he said, pointing at me, “whatever value she’s had
has been completely overshadowed by her inability to contain herself.
    “This has all gone terribly wrong. And I know you. I know you’re afraid of missing
something, so this is my thought.”
    I watched the king walk around Maxon. “Let’s call this off. Let’s get rid of all the girls.”
    Maxon opened his mouth to protest, but the king held up a hand. “I’m not suggesting you
stay single. I’m simply saying that we still have the entries of all the eligible girls in the
country sitting around somewhere. Wouldn’t it be nice if you got to handpick a few girls to
come to the palace? Maybe find one who looks like the French king’s daughter; remember
how fond you were of her?”
    I lowered my eyes. Maxon had never mentioned a French girl.
    It genuinely felt as if someone took a chisel and chipped a crack in my heart.
    “Father, I couldn’t.”
    “Oh, but you could. You’re the prince. And I think we’ve had enough outbursts that we
could deem this lot unfit. You could have a real choice this time.”
    I looked up again. Maxon’s eyes were focused on the floor. I could see he was struggling.
    “This might even appease the rebels temporarily. Think of that!” the king added. “If we
send these girls home, wait a few months like we’re calling off the Selection, and then bring
in a new group of lovely, educated, pleasant women . . . that could change a lot of things.”
    Maxon tried to say something but only closed his mouth again.
    “Either way, you should ask yourself if that,” he said, pointing to me again, “is someone
you could really spend your life with. Dramatic, selfish, money hungry, and, to be quite
honest, very plain. Look at her, son.”
    Maxon’s eyes darted down to mine, holding them for a second before I had to turn away
from humiliation.
    “I’ll give you a few days. For now there’s the press to deal with. Amberly.”
    The queen scurried over, placing her arm through the king’s, leaving us alone and
speechless.
    After a short pause, Maxon came to help me stand up.
    “Thanks.”
    Maxon only nodded. “I should probably go with them. No doubt they’ll have questions for
me as well.”
    “That’s a pretty nice offer,” I commented.
    “Maybe the most generous one he’s ever made.”
    I didn’t want to know if he was seriously considering this. There was nothing else to say,
so I made my way past him, taking the back route to my room, hoping to outrun everything I
was feeling.

My maids informed me that dinner would be on our own tonight, and when I couldn’t be
bothered to communicate with them, they graciously excused themselves. I lay on my bed,
lost in my thoughts.
    I’d done the right thing today, hadn’t I? I believed in justice, but the Convicting wasn’t
justice. Still, I kept wondering if I’d actually accomplished anything. If that man was an
enemy to the king somehow, which I had to believe he was, then surely he would be punished
in some other way. Was it all for nothing?
    And as frivolous as it was when I considered everything else going on, I couldn’t stop
thinking about this French girl. Why hadn’t Maxon mentioned her? Was she here a lot? Why
would he keep her a secret?
    I heard the knock and assumed it was my food, even though it seemed a little early.
    “Come in,” I called, not wanting to get out of bed.
    The door opened, and Celeste’s dark hair swished into view.
    “In the mood for some company?” she asked. Kriss peeked in behind her, and I saw the
edge of Elise’s arm hiding in the back.
    I sat up. “Sure.”
    They ambled in, leaving the door open. Celeste, still shocking me every time she smiled so
genuinely, climbed into my bed without even asking. Not that I minded. Kriss followed,
sitting closer to my feet, and Elise balanced on the edge, ever the lady.
    Kriss quietly asked what I was sure they were all wondering. “Did he hurt you?”
    “No.” Then I realized that wasn’t entirely true. “He didn’t hit me or anything; he just
pulled me away a little too roughly.”
    “What did he say?” Elise fiddled with a piece of her dress as she spoke.
    “He’s not happy with my outburst. If it was the king choosing, I’d be long gone by now.”
    Celeste touched my arm. “But he’s not. Maxon’s fond of you, and so are the people.”
    “I don’t know if that’s enough.” For any of us, I added in my head.
    “Sorry I yelled at you,” Elise said quietly. “It’s frustrating. I try so hard to keep cool and
confident, but I feel like nothing I do matters. You all outshine me.”
    “That’s not true,” Kriss argued. “At this point, we all mean something to Maxon. We
wouldn’t be here otherwise.”
    “He’s afraid to get to the final three,” Elise countered. “He’s supposed to choose within,
what, four days when it’s down to three? He’s holding on to me to keep from making that
decision.”
    “Who’s to say he’s not holding on to me?” Celeste suggested.
    “Listen,” I said, “after today I’ll probably be going home next. It was bound to happen
sooner or later. I’m just not cut out for this.”
    Kriss giggled. “None of us is an Amberly, are we?”
    “I like shocking people too much,” Celeste said with a smile.
    “And I’d rather hide than do half the things she has to.” Elise ducked her head.
    “I’m too wild.” I shrugged my shoulders, embracing my faults.
    “I’ll never have her confidence,” Kriss mourned.
    “So there. We’re all messed up. But Maxon has to pick one of us, so there’s no point
worrying anymore.” Celeste toyed with the blanket. “But I think we can all agree that any of
you would be a better choice than me.”
    After a heavy silence, Kriss spoke up. “What do you mean?”
    Celeste looked across at her. “You know. Everyone does.” She took a deep breath and
continued. “I’ve kind of already had this discussion with America, and I broke down to my
maids the other day, but I’ve never actually apologized to you two.”
    Kriss and Elise looked at each other briefly before focusing again on Celeste.
    “Kriss, I ruined your birthday party,” she blurted. “You were the only one who’s been able
to celebrate in the palace, and I took that moment from you. I’m so sorry.”
    Kriss shrugged. “It turned out okay in the end. Maxon and I had a great talk because of
you. I forgave you a long time ago.”
    Celeste actually looked like she might cry, but she pushed her lips together into a tight
smile. “That’s generous considering I’m having a hard time forgiving myself.” Celeste dabbed
at her lashes. “I just didn’t know how to hold his attention, so I stole it from you.”
    Kriss took a deep breath. “It felt awful at the time, but it really is all right. I’m fine. At
least it wasn’t like with Anna.”
    Celeste rolled her eyes shamefully. “Don’t even get me started. Sometimes I wonder how
far she would have made it if I hadn’t . . .” She shook her head before moving her gaze to
Elise. “I don’t know how you could ever excuse all the things I’ve done to you. Even the ones
you don’t know were me.”
    Elise, ever poised, didn’t explode like I might have in her place. “You mean the glass in my
shoes, the ruined gowns hanging in my closet, the bleach in my shampoo?”
    “Bleach!” I gasped, finding confirmation in Celeste’s tired face.
    Elise nodded. “I missed a morning in the Women’s Room so my maids could dye it back.”
She turned from me to Celeste. “I knew it was you,” she confessed calmly.
    Celeste hung her head, absolutely mortified. “You didn’t speak, you barely did anything. In
my eyes, you were the easiest target, and I was shocked you never broke.”
    “I would never dishonor my family by quitting,” Elise said. I loved her conviction, even if I
didn’t completely understand it.
    “They should be proud of everything you’ve endured. If my parents had any idea how low
I’ve sunk . . . I don’t know what they’d say. If Maxon’s parents knew, I’m sure they’d have
kicked me out by now. I’m not fit for this.” She breathed out, struggling to confess.
    I leaned forward, putting my hands on hers. “I think this change of heart would prove
otherwise, Celeste.”
    She tilted her head and gave me a sad smile. “All the same, I don’t think he wants me.
Even if he did,” she added, pulling her hands from mine to tidy up her eye makeup, “someone
recently reminded me that I don’t need a man to get what I want out of life.”
    We shared a grin before she turned back to Elise.
    “I can never begin to apologize for everything I’ve done to you, but I need you to know
how sincerely I regret it. I’m sorry, Elise.”
    Elise didn’t waver, staring Celeste down. I braced myself for her vicious words now that
Celeste was finally at her mercy.
    “I could tell him. America and Kriss would be my witnesses, and Maxon would have to
send you home.”
    Celeste swallowed. How humiliating it would be to leave like that!
    “I won’t though,” Elise said, finally. “I would never force Maxon’s hand, and win or lose, I
want to do it with integrity. So let’s move forward.”
    It wasn’t an actual statement of forgiveness, but it was above and beyond what Celeste
was expecting. It was all she could do to keep herself together as she nodded and whispered
her thanks to Elise.
    “Wow,” Kriss said, attempting to change the subject, “I mean, I didn’t want to tell on you
either, Celeste, but . . . I didn’t think about honor being behind that choice.” Kriss turned to
Elise, thinking over the words.
    “It’s always on my mind,” Elise confessed. “I have to hold on to it however I can,
especially since I’ll be an embarrassment to my family if I don’t win.”
    “How is it your fault if he’s the one doing the choosing?” Kriss asked, shifting her weight
and settling back in. “How would that make you an embarrassment?”
    Elise turned in more, moving from one worry to another. “Because of the arranged-
marriage thing. The best girls get the best men and vice versa. Maxon is the height of
perfection. If I lose, it means that I wasn’t good enough. My family won’t think about the
feelings behind his choice, which is what I’m sure he’ll judge by. They’ll look at it logically.
My breeding, my talents—I was raised to be worthy of the best, so if I’m not, then who will
have me when I leave?”
    I’d thought about how my life would change if I won or lost a million times, but I’d never
considered what it would mean for the others. After everything with Celeste, I really should
have.
    Kriss put a hand on Elise’s. “Almost all the girls who went home are already engaged to
wonderful men. To be a part of the Selection at all makes you a prize. And you made it to the
top four of the Elite at the very least. Trust me, Elise, guys will be lined up around the block
for you.”
    Elise smiled. “I don’t need a line. I just need one.”
    “Well, I need a line,” Celeste said, making us all chuckle, even Elise.
    “I’d like a handful,” Kriss said. “A line does sound overwhelming.”
    They looked at me. “One.”
    “You’re nuts,” Celeste decided.
    We talked for a while about Maxon, about home, about our hopes. We’d never really
spoken like this, without any kind of wall between us. Kriss and I had been working on it,
trying to be honest and upfront about the competition; but now that we could just talk about
life, I could tell that our relationships would survive the palace. Elise was a surprise, but the
fact that her perspective came from such a different place than mine made me think on a
deeper level, opening me up.
    And the bombshell: Celeste. If someone had told me that the brunette in the heels who
walked over so menacingly that first day in the airport would be the girl I was happiest to
have settled next to me at this very moment, I would have laughed in their face. The thought
was almost as unbelievable as the fact that I was still here, one of the last girls and very
heartbroken about how close I was to losing Maxon.
    As we spoke, I could see her being accepted by the others as fully as she was now by me.
She even looked different with the weight of her secrets cast off from her. Celeste had been
raised to be a specific kind of pretty. That beauty depended on covering things up, shifting the
light, and seeking to be perfect at all times. But there is a different kind of beauty that comes
with humility and honesty, and she was glowing with it now.
    Maxon must have walked up very quietly, because I had no idea how long he had been
standing at the door, watching us. It was Elise who saw his figure on the edge of my room and
stiffened first.
    “Your Majesty,” she said, bowing her head.
    We all looked over, sure we’d misheard her.
    “Ladies.” He nodded his head back at us. “I didn’t mean to interrupt. I think I just ruined
something here.”
    We looked at one another, and I felt sure I wasn’t the only one thinking, No, you made
something really amazing.
    “Everything’s fine,” I said.
    “Again, I’m sorry to intrude, but I need to speak to America. Alone.”
    Celeste sighed and started moving, looking back to wink at me before she stood. Elise rose
quickly, and Kriss followed, giving my leg a little squeeze as she hopped off the bed. Elise
gave Maxon a curtsy as she left, while Kriss paused to straighten his lapel. Celeste walked up,
as strong as I’d ever seen her, and whispered something into Maxon’s ear.
    When she was done, he smiled. “I don’t think that will be necessary.”
    “Good.” She left, closing the door behind her, and I stood to take whatever was coming.
    “What was that about?” I asked, nodding toward the door.
    “Oh, Celeste was making it clear that if I hurt you, she’d make me cry,” he said with a
smile.
    I laughed. “I’ve been on the receiving end of those nails, so be careful there.”
    “Yes, ma’am.”
    I took in a breath, letting my smile fade. “So?”
    “So?”
    “Are you going to do it?”
    Maxon grinned and shook his head. “No. It was an intriguing thought for a moment, but I
don’t want to start over. I like my imperfect girls.” He shrugged, his face content. “Besides,
Father doesn’t know about August, or what the Northern rebels’ goals are, or any of that. His
solutions are shortsighted. Jumping ship now would be just that.”
    I sighed in relief. I’d hoped that Maxon cared about me enough not to let me go, but after
sitting with the girls, I didn’t want to see that happen to them either.
    “Besides,” he added, seeming pleased, “you should have seen the press.”
    “Why? What happened?” I begged, moving closer.
    “They were impressed with you once again. I don’t think even I quite understand the
mood of the country right now. It’s as if . . . it’s as if they know things could be different. The
way he governs the country is the same way he governs me. He feels no one is capable of
making the right decisions but him, so he forces his opinions on people. And, after reading
Gregory’s diaries, it sounds like it’s been that way for a while.
    “But no one wants that anymore. People want a choice.” Maxon shook his head. “You’re
terrifying to him, but he can’t expel you. They adore you, America.”
    I swallowed. “Adore?”
    He nodded. “And . . . I feel similarly. So, no matter what he says or does, don’t lose faith.
This isn’t over.”
    I placed my fingers on my lips, shocked by the news. The Selection would continue, the
girls and I still had our chance, and, based on Maxon’s report, the people were approving of
me more and more.
    But for all the good news, one thing was still pressing on me.
    I looked down at the blanket, almost afraid to ask. “I know this will sound stupid . . . but
who’s the French king’s daughter?”
    Maxon was silent for a moment before he sat down on the bed. “Her name is Daphne.
Before the Selection, she was the only girl I really knew.”
    “And?”
    He huffed out a soundless laugh. “And a little late in the game I discovered her feelings
for me went a little bit deeper than friendship. But I didn’t return those feelings. I couldn’t.”
    “Was there something wrong with her or—”
    “America, no.” Maxon reached for my hand, forcing me to look at him. “Daphne is my
friend. That’s all she ever could be. I spent my life waiting for you, for all of you. This was my
chance to find a wife, and I’ve known that for as long as I can remember. Romantically, my
interactions with Daphne were nonexistent. I’d never have thought to mention her name to
you, and I’m certain the only reason Father did was to give you yet another opportunity to
doubt yourself.”
    I bit my lip. The king knew my weaknesses too well.
    “I watch you do it, America. You compare yourself to my mother, to the other Elite, to a
version of yourself you think you ought to be, and now you’re about to do the same thing
with a person you didn’t know existed until a few hours ago.”
    It was true. I was already wondering if she was prettier than me, smarter than me, and if
she said Maxon’s name with a ridiculously flirtatious accent.
    “America,” he said, cupping my face in his hand. “If she had mattered, I would have told
you. The same way you would with me.”
    My stomach turned. I hadn’t been completely honest with Maxon. But with his eyes right
there, staring so deeply into mine, it was easy to dismiss all that. I could forget about
everything surrounding us when he looked at me like that. And so I did.
    I fell into Maxon’s arms, holding him tightly. There was no place in the world I wanted to
be more.
CHAPTER 21

CELESTE HAD BECOME THE CHAMPION of our newfound sisterhood. It was her idea to drag all our
maids and a bunch of big mirrors down to the Women’s Room and essentially spend the day
making one another over. There wasn’t much point, seeing as there was no way any of us
could do a better job than the palace staff, but it was fun all the same.
    Kriss held the ends of my hair across my forehead. “Have you ever considered getting
bangs?”
    “A couple of times,” I admitted, fluffing the fringe hanging just above my eyes. “But my
sister usually ends up annoyed with hers, so I change my mind.”
    “I think you’d look cute,” Kriss said enthusiastically. “I cut some for my cousin once. I
could do yours if you want.”
    “Yeah,” Celeste chimed in. “Let her near your face with scissors, America. Great idea.”
    We all burst into laughter. I even noticed a tiny giggle from the other end of the room. I
glanced over to see the queen pursing her lips together tightly as she attempted to read the
file in front of her. I was worried she’d find all this a bit improper, but, honestly, I wasn’t sure
I’d ever seen her so happy.
    “We should take pictures!” Elise said.
    “Anyone got a camera?” Celeste asked. “I’m a pro at this.”
    “Maxon does!” Kriss shouted. “Come here for a minute,” she said to a maid, waving her
over encouragingly.
    “Hold on,” I said, grabbing some paper. “Okay, okay. ‘Your Highest of Highnesses, the
ladies of the Elite require, immediately, the least fancy of your cameras for . . .’”
    Kriss giggled, and Celeste shook her head.
    “Oh! A study in feminine diplomacy,” Elise added.
    “Is that a real thing?” Kriss asked.
    Celeste tossed her hair. “Who cares?”
    Maybe twenty minutes later, Maxon knocked on the door and pushed it open an inch.
“Can I come in?”
    Kriss ran over. “No. We just want the camera.” And she snatched it from his hand and
closed the door in his face.
    Celeste fell on the floor, laughing.
    “What are you doing in there?” he called. But we were all too busy doubling over to
answer.
    There were lots of poses behind the shrubs and a thousand kisses blown, and Celeste
showed us all how to “find the light.”
    As Kriss and Elise lay down on the couch and Celeste climbed above them to snap more
photos, I looked over and saw the satisfied smile on the queen’s face. It felt wrong that she
wasn’t a part of this. I snatched up one of the brushes and walked over to her.
    “Hello, Lady America,” she greeted.
    “Could I brush your hair?”
    Several emotions played across her face, but she only nodded and spoke quietly. “Of
course.”
    I walked behind her and picked up a handful of her absolutely gorgeous hair. I raked the
brush down again and again, watching the other girls as I did so.
    “It does my heart good to see you all getting along,” she commented.
    “Me, too. I like them.” I was quiet for a while. “I’m sorry about the Convicting. I know I
shouldn’t have done that. I just . . .”
    “I know, dear. You explained it all beforehand. It’s a difficult task. And you did seem to
have a sickly bunch.”
    I realized then how out of the loop she was. Or maybe she simply chose to believe the best
about her husband at all costs.
    As if she could read my thoughts, she spoke. “I know you think Clarkson’s harsh, but he’s
a good man. You have no idea how stressful it is to be in his shoes. We all deal with it in our
own ways. He has a temper sometimes; I need lots of rest; Maxon jokes it off.”
    “He does, doesn’t he?” I said, laughing.
    “The question is, how would you handle it?” She turned her head. “I think your passion is
one of your best features. If you could learn to control it, you could be a wonderful princess.”
    I nodded. “I’m sorry I let you down.”
    “No, no, dear,” she said, turning forward. “I see potential in you. I worked in a factory
when I was your age. I was dirty and hungry, and sometimes I was angry. But I had an
undying crush on the prince of Illéa, and when I got the chance to make him my own, I
learned to check those feelings. There’s a lot to be done from here, but it might not happen
the way you want it to. You need to learn to accept that, okay?”
    “Yes, Mom,” I joked.
    She looked back at me, her face like stone.
    “I mean, ma’am. Ma’am.”
    Her eyes started glistening, and she blinked a few times, turning forward again. “If it ends
as I suspect it will, Mom will be just fine.”
    And then it was my turn to blink back the tears. It wasn’t like I was ever going to replace
my mother; but it felt special to be accepted, with all my flaws, by the mother of the person I
might marry.
    Celeste turned and saw us, and she ran over. “You’re so cute! Smile.”
    I leaned down, wrapping my arms around Queen Amberly, and she reached up to touch
my hands. After that, we all took turns crowding around her, getting her to finally make one
silly face for the camera. The maids helped take pictures so we could all be in some together;
and, by the end of it, I could easily say that was my best day in the palace. I didn’t know if that
would hold though. Christmas was right around the corner.

My maids were fixing my hair after Elise’s last terrible attempt at an up-do when there was a
knock on the door.
   Mary rushed to answer it, and a guard whose name I didn’t know came into the room. I’d
seen him around a lot, almost exclusively at the king’s side.
   My maids curtsied as he walked closer, and I was more than a little anxious when he
stopped in front of me.
   “Lady America, the king requires your presence at once,” he said coolly.
   “Is anything wrong?” I asked, stalling.
   “The king will answer your questions.”
    I swallowed. Every awful thing ran through my head. My family was in danger. The king
had found a way to punish me quietly for all the ways I’d wronged him. He’d discovered we’d
sneaked out of the palace. Or, perhaps worst of all, someone had figured out my connection
to Aspen, and we were both about to pay for it.
    I tried to shake the fear out of my system. I didn’t want any of it to show in front of King
Clarkson.
    “I’ll follow you then.” I stood and started walking behind the guard, giving one last glance
to the girls as I left. When I saw the worry on their faces, I wished I hadn’t.
    We went down the hall and started up the stairs to the third floor. I didn’t quite know
what to do with my hands, and I kept touching my hair or my dress or lacing my fingers
together.
    When we were about halfway down the hall, I saw Maxon, and that helped. He paused just
outside a room, waiting for me. There was no concern in his eyes, but he was better at hiding
his fear than I was.
    “What’s this about?” I whispered.
    “Your guess is as good as mine.”
    The guard took his place outside the door as Maxon escorted me inside. In the wide room,
there were shelves of books along one wall. On easels, several maps were set up. There were
at least three separate ones of Illéa, with markers in different colors. At a wide desk, the king
sat with a piece of paper in his hand.
    As he noticed Maxon and me enter the room, the king straightened.
    “What exactly have you done with the Italian princess?” King Clarkson demanded, staring
at me.
    I froze. The money. I’d forgotten all about that. Conspiring to sell weapons to people he
viewed as enemies was worse than any of the other scenarios for which I’d been preparing.
    “I’m not sure what you mean,” I lied, looking to Maxon. Even though he knew everything,
he remained calm.
    “We have been trying to make an alliance with the Italians for decades, and all of a sudden
the royal family is quite interested in having us visit. However”—the king picked up the letter,
searching for a specific section—“ah, here. ‘While it would be more than an honor to have
Your Majesty and your family grace us with your company, we hope that Lady America will
also be able to visit with you. After meeting all the Elite, we can’t imagine anyone following in
the queen’s footsteps quite like her.’”
    The king raised his eyes back to me. “What have you done?”
    Realizing I’d dodged something huge, I relaxed marginally. “All I’ve done was try to be
polite toward the princess and her mother when they’ve visited. I didn’t know she liked me so
much.”
    King Clarkson rolled his eyes. “You’re subversive. I’ve been watching you, and you’re here
for something; and it sure as hell isn’t him.”
    Maxon turned to me at those words. I wished I hadn’t seen the flicker of doubt in his eyes.
I shook my head. “That’s not true!”
    “Then how did a girl of no means, no connections, and no power manage to get this
country within the reach of something it’s been trying to achieve for years? How?”
    In my heart, I knew that there were factors here that he was oblivious to. But it was
Nicoletta who had offered assistance to me, who had asked if she could do anything for a
cause she wanted to support. If he’d accused me of something that was actually my fault, his
rising voice would have been frightening. As it was, he came across like a child.
    In response, I spoke quietly. “You were the ones who assigned us to entertain your foreign
guests. I never would have met any of those women otherwise. And she’s the one who wrote,
inviting me to come. I didn’t beg for a trip to Italy. Maybe if you were simply more
welcoming, you’d have had your alliance with Italy years ago.”
    He stood forcefully. “Watch. Your. Mouth.”
    Maxon put an arm around me. “Perhaps it’s best you left, America.”
    I happily started moving, keen to be anywhere the king wasn’t. But that was not what King
Clarkson had in mind.
    “Stop. I have more,” he insisted. “This changes things. We can’t reset the Selection and
risk upsetting the Italians. They have a lot of influence. If we can get them, they’ll open a lot
of doors for us.”
    Maxon nodded, not upset at all. He had already made the choice to keep us here, but we
had to play along and let the king think he was in control.
    “We’ll simply have to draw out the Selection,” he concluded. My heart plummeted. “We
have to give the Italians time to accept the other options as viable without offending them.
Perhaps we should schedule a trip over there soon, give everyone an opportunity to shine.”
    He looked so pleased with himself, so proud of his solution. I wondered how far he would
go. Prep Celeste, maybe. Or arrange for some private time with Kriss and Nicoletta. I wouldn’t
put it past him to make me look bad deliberately, the way he had tried to in the Convicting. If
he went to all the lengths he could without openly incriminating himself, I wasn’t sure I had
much of a chance.
    And forget the political side of it. More time meant more opportunities to embarrass
myself.
    “Father, I’m not sure that would help,” Maxon interjected. “The Italian ladies have already
met all the candidates. If they’re showing a preference for America, it must have come from
something they like in her that wasn’t visible in the others. You can’t simply make that exist.”
    The king looked at Maxon, venom in his eyes. “Are you declaring your choice right now
then? Is the Selection over?”
    My pulse stopped altogether.
    “No,” Maxon answered, as if the very thought was ridiculous. “I’m just not sure what
you’re suggesting is the right course.”
    King Clarkson propped his chin on his hand, looking back and forth between Maxon and
me, staring at us like some equation he couldn’t solve.
    “She has yet to prove herself trustworthy. Until that time, you cannot choose her.” The
king’s face was unyielding.
    “And how do you suggest she does that?” Maxon countered. “What exactly do you need in
order to be satisfied?”
    The king raised his eyebrows, seeming amused at his son’s questions. After a moment of
consideration, he pulled a small file out of his drawer.
    “Even excluding your recent stunt on the Report, there seems to be a bit of unrest these
days between the castes. I’ve been wanting to find a way to . . . aid in soothing the opinions of
the moment; but it occurred to me that someone as fresh and young and, dare I say, popular
as you are might do better at this than I would.”
    Pushing the file across the desk, he continued. “It seems the people follow your tunes.
Perhaps you would sing one of mine for them.”
    I opened the folder and read the papers. “What is this?”
    “Just some service announcements we’ll be making soon. We know, of course, the caste
makeup of each province and all the communities within them, so we’ll be sending specific
ones to certain areas. Encouraging them.”
    “What is it, America?” Maxon asked, confused by his father’s words.
    “They’re like . . . commercials,” I answered. “Advertisements to be happy with your own
caste, not to associate closely with those outside it.”
    “Father, what’s this about?”
    The king leaned back in his chair, relaxing. “It’s nothing serious. I’m merely trying to quell
the unrest. If I don’t do it, you’ll have an uprising on your hands by the time I pass down the
crown.”
    “How so?”
    “The lower castes tend to get unruly from time to time—it’s natural. But we have to
subdue the anger and squash the ideas of usurping power quickly, before they unite and undo
our great nation.”
    Maxon stared at his father, still not fully comprehending his words. If Aspen hadn’t clued
me in to sympathizers, I might have been the same way. The king was planning to divide and
conquer: make the castes absurdly grateful for what they had—even if they were being treated
like they didn’t matter—and tell them not to associate with those outside of their castes, for
they certainly wouldn’t understand the plight of anyone outside their own.
    “This is propaganda,” I spat, remembering the word from Dad’s tattered history book.
    The king tried to soothe me. “No, no. It’s a suggestion. It’s reinforcement. It’s a way of
looking at the world that will keep our country happy.”
    “Happy? So you want me to tell some Seven that . . .”—I hunted for the words on the sheet
—“‘your task is possibly the greatest of our nation. You toil with your body and build the very
roads and buildings that make our land.’” I searched for more. “‘No Two or Three could equal
your talent, so turn your eyes away from them on the street. No need to speak with those who
may rank higher than you by caste but are beneath you in your contribution.’”
    Maxon turned from me to his father. “Surely, that will alienate our people.”
    “On the contrary. It will help settle them into their places and make them feel that the
palace has their best interests at heart.”
    “Do you?” I shot.
    “Of course I do!” the king yelled.
    His outburst made me take a few steps back.
    “People need to be led by the bit, with blinders on like horses. If you do not guide their
steps, they run astray, straight into what’s worst for them. You may not like these little
speeches, but they’ll do more, save more, than you know.”
    My heart was still slowing as he finished speaking, and I stood silently with the papers in
my hands.
    I knew he was worried. Every time he got a report of something happening beyond his
control, he crushed it. He lumped all change together, calling it treason before inspecting it.
His answer this time was to have me do what Gregory did and isolate his people.
    “I can’t say it,” I whispered.
    He responded calmly. “Then you cannot marry my son.”
    “Father!”
    King Clarkson held up a hand. “We’re at that point, Maxon. I’ve let you have your way,
and now we must negotiate. If you want this girl to stay, then she must be obedient. If she
cannot follow through with the simplest of tasks, my only conclusion is that she doesn’t love
you. If that’s the case, I can’t see why you would want her in the first place.”
    I locked eyes with the king, hating him for putting the thought in Maxon’s head.
    “Do you? Do you love him at all?”
    This wasn’t how I was going to say it. Not at the end of an ultimatum, not for business.
    The king tilted his head. “How sad, Maxon. She needs to think about it.”
    Do not cry. Do not cry.
    “I’ll give you some time to find out where you stand. If you won’t do this, then rules be
damned, I’ll be kicking you out by Christmas Day. What a special gift that will be for your
parents.”
    Three days.
    He smiled. I set the folder on his desk and left, trying not to break into a run. All I needed
was another excuse for him to say I was flawed.
    “America!” Maxon yelled. “Stop!”
    I kept walking until he grabbed me by the wrist, forcing me to pause.
    “What the hell was that?” he demanded.
    “He’s insane!” I was on the verge of tears, but I held them in. If the king came out and saw
me that way, I’d never live it down.
    Maxon shook his head. “Not him. You. Why didn’t you agree to do it?”
    I looked at him, gob-smacked. “It’s a trick, Maxon. Everything he’s doing is a trick.”
    “If you had said yes, I would have ended this now.”
    Incredulous, I fired back. “Two seconds before, you had the chance to end it and didn’t.
How is this my fault?”
    “Because,” he answered, his whole demeanor urgent, “you are denying me your love. It’s
the only thing I’ve wanted in this entire competition, and you still hold back. I keep waiting
for you to say it, and you won’t. If you couldn’t say it out loud in front of him, fine. But if you
had simply agreed, that would have been good enough for me.”
    “And why would I when, for as far as we’ve come, he could still push me out? While I’m
humiliated over and over again, and you stand by? That’s not love, Maxon. You don’t even
know what love is.”
    “The hell I don’t! Do you have any idea what I’ve been through—”
    “Maxon, you were the one who said you wanted to stop arguing. So stop giving me reasons
to argue with you!”
    I stormed away. What was I still doing here? I kept torturing myself for someone who had
no idea what it meant to be faithful to one person. And he never would, because his whole
concept of romance revolved around the Selection. He wouldn’t ever understand.
    As I was about to hit the stairwell, I was whipped back again. Maxon held me tightly, both
of his hands gripping my arms. Surely he could see how furious I still was, but in the seconds
that had passed, his demeanor had shifted completely.
    “I’m not him,” he said.
    “What?” I demanded, trying to free myself.
    “America, stop.” I huffed and quit struggling. Without any other options, I looked into
Maxon’s eyes. “I’m not him, all right?”
    “I don’t know what you mean.”
    He sighed. “I know that you spent years pouring yourself into another person who you
thought was going to love you forever; and when he was faced with the realities of the world,
he abandoned you.” I froze, taking in his words. “I’m not him, America. I have no intentions
of giving up on you.”
    I shook my head. “You can’t see it, Maxon. He might have let me down, but at least I knew
him. After all this time, I still feel like there’s a gap between us. The Selection has forced you
to hand over your affection in slices. I’ll never really have all of you. None of us will.”
    When I shrugged myself free this time, he didn’t fight me.
CHAPTER 22

I DIDN’T REMEMBER MUCH OF the Report. I sat on my pedestal, thinking as every second passed
that I was that much closer to being sent home. Then it dawned on me that staying wasn’t
much better. If I caved and read those horrible messages, the king would win. Maybe Maxon
did love me, but if he wasn’t man enough to say it out loud, then how could he ever protect
me from the most frightening thing in my life: his father.
    I would always be bending to King Clarkson’s will; and for all the support Maxon had
from the Northern rebels, behind these walls, he would be alone.
    I was angry at Maxon, and I was angry at his father, and I was angry at the Selection and
everything that came with it. All the frustration knotted itself around my heart to the point
where it made no sense, and I wished more than anything that I could talk to the girls about
what was going on.
    That wasn’t possible though. It wouldn’t make anything better for me, and it would only
make things worse for them. Sooner or later, I’d have to face my concerns by myself.
    I peeked to my left, looking down the row of the Elite. I realized that whoever stayed
would have to face this without the rest of us. The pressures the public would set on us,
demanding to be a part of our lives, as well as the commands of the king, ever seeking to use
anyone within reach as a tool in his plans—all on the shoulders of one girl.
    I tentatively reached out for Celeste’s hand, fingers brushing against hers. The second she
felt them, she took hold, looking into my eyes with concern.
    What’s wrong? she mouthed.
    I shrugged.
    And so she just held my hand.
    After a minute, she seemed to get a little sad, too. While the men in suits prattled on, she
stretched out, reaching for Kriss’s hand. Kriss didn’t question it, and it took her only seconds
to extend her hand for Elise’s.
    And there we were, in the background of it all, holding on to one another. The
Perfectionist, the Sweetheart, the Diva . . . and me.

I spent the next morning in the Women’s Room, being as obedient as I could. Several of the
extended family members were in town, ready to spend Christmas Day in style. Tonight there
was supposed to be a magnificent dinner and carol singing. Typically Christmas Eve was one
of my favorite times of the year, but I felt too unsettled to even get excited.
    There was a fantastic meal that I didn’t taste and beautiful gifts from the public that I
barely saw. I was crushed.
    As the relatives started getting tipsy on eggnog, I slipped away, not up to pretending to be
jolly. By the end of the night, I’d either have to agree to do King Clarkson’s ridiculous
commercials or let him send me home. I needed to think.
    Back in my room, I sent my maids away and sat at my table, considering. I didn’t want to
do this. I didn’t want to tell the people to be satisfied with what they had, even if it was
nothing. I didn’t want to discourage people from helping one another. I didn’t want to
eliminate the possibility of more, to be the face and voice of a campaign that said, “Be still.
Let the king run your life. That’s the best you can hope for.”
     But . . . didn’t I love Maxon?
     A second later, a knock came at the door. I reluctantly went to answer it, dreading King
Clarkson’s cold eyes as he followed through on his ultimatum.
     I opened the door to Maxon. He stood there wordlessly.
     And all my anger made sense. I wanted everything from him and everything for him,
because I wanted every piece of him. It was infuriating that everyone had to have their hands
on this—the girls, his parents, even Aspen. So many conditions and opinions and obligations
surrounded us, and I hated Maxon because they came with him.
     And I loved him even so.
     I was about to agree to do those awful announcements when he quietly held out his hand.
     “Come with me?”
     “Okay.”
     I closed the door behind me and followed Maxon down the hall.
     “You have a point,” he started. “I am afraid to show all of you every piece of me. You get
some, Kriss gets others, and so on. And I’ve based that on what feels appropriate for each of
you. With you, I always like coming to you, to your room. It’s as if I’m stepping into a bit of
your world, and if I do that enough, I can get all of you. Does that make sense?”
     “Kind of,” I said as we turned up the stairs.
     “But that’s not really fair, or even accurate. You explained to me once that these are our
rooms, not yours. Anyway, I thought it was time I show you another piece of my world,
maybe the last one where you’re concerned.”
     “Oh?”
     He nodded as we stopped in front of a door. “My room.”
     “Really?”
     “Only Kriss has seen it, and that was a bit of an impulse. I’m not unhappy I showed her,
but I feel as if it pushed things forward quickly. You know how private I can be.”
     “I do.”
     He wrapped his fingers around the handle. “I’ve wanted to share this with you, and I think
it’s well past the time. It’s not exactly something special, but it’s mine. So, I don’t know, I just
want you to see it.”
     “Okay.” I could tell he was feeling bashful, like maybe he’d built it up to be a bigger deal
than it was, or maybe he’d regret showing me at all.
     He took a deep breath and opened the door, letting me walk in first.
     It was huge. The paneling was dark, some wood I wasn’t familiar with lining the whole
space. On the far wall, a wide fireplace stood, waiting to be used. The whole thing must have
been for show since it never seemed to get cold enough here to justify a fire.
     His bathroom door was cracked open, and I could see a porcelain tub on the elaborately
tiled floor. He had his own collection of books and a table near the fireplace that looked like it
was intended for dining rather than work. I wondered how many lonely meals he’d had here.
Near the doors that opened to his private balcony, a glass case full of guns sat, perfectly lined
up. I’d forgotten his love of hunting.
     His bed, also made from a dark wood, was massive. I wanted to go and touch it, to see if it
felt as good as it looked.
     “Maxon, you could fit a football team in there,” I teased.
     “Tried it once. Not as comfortable as you’d think.”
     I turned to swat at him, glad to see him in a playful mood. It was then, looking past his
smiling face, that I saw the pictures. I inhaled sharply, taking in the beautiful display behind
him.
     On the wall by Maxon’s door was a vast collage, wide enough to be wallpaper for my room
back home. There didn’t appear to be any sort of order to it, just image upon image piled up
for him to enjoy.
     I could see photos that surely had to have been taken by him, because they were of the
palace, which was where he was almost all the time. Close-ups of tapestries, shots of the
ceiling he must have lain flat on the carpet to get, and so many pictures of the gardens. There
were others, maybe of places he hoped to see or had at least visited. I saw an ocean so blue it
didn’t seem possible. There were a few bridges, and one of a wall-like structure that looked
like it went on for miles.
     But above all this, I saw my face a dozen times over. There was the picture of me that was
taken for my Selection application, and the one of Maxon and me taken for the magazine
when I wore that sash. We seemed happy there, as if it was all a game. I’d never seen that
photo, or the one from the article on Halloween. I remembered Maxon standing behind me
while we looked at designs for my costume. While I’m staring at the sketch, Maxon’s eyes are
slightly turned toward me.
     Then there were the photos he took. One of me shocked when the king and queen of
Swendway visited and he’d quickly yelled out “Smile.” One of me sitting on the set for the
Report, laughing at Marlee. He must have been hiding behind the blinding lights, stealing
little images of us when we were all just being ourselves. And there was another one of me in
the night, standing on my balcony and looking at the moon.
     The other girls were in them, too, the remaining ones more than the others; but every
once in a while I’d see Anna’s eyes peek out from under a landscape or Marlee’s smile hiding
in a corner. And though they were just taken, pictures of Kriss and Celeste posing in the
Women’s Room were up there, too, next to Elise pretending to faint on a couch and me with
my arms wrapped around his mother.
     “Maxon,” I breathed. “It’s beautiful.”
     “You like it?”
     “I’m in awe of it. How many of these did you take?”
     “Nearly all of them, but ones like this,” he said, pointing to one of the pictures used in the
magazines, “I asked for.” He pointed again. “I took this one in the very southern part of
Honduragua. I used to think it was interesting, but now it makes me sad.”
     The image was of some pipes spilling smoke into the sky. “I used to look at the air, but
now I remember how much I hated the smell of it. And people live in that all the time. I was
so self-absorbed.”
     “Where is this?” I asked, pointing to the long brick wall.
     “New Asia. It used to be to the north of what was the Chinese border. They called it the
Great Wall. I hear it was once quite spectacular, but now it’s mostly gone. It runs less than
halfway through the middle of New Asia. That’s how much they’ve expanded.”
     “Wow.”
     Maxon put his hands behind his back. “I was really hoping you would like it.”
     “I do. So much. I want you to make me one.”
    “You do?”
    “Yes. Or teach me to. I can’t even tell you how often I wished I could catch snippets of my
life and hold on to them like this. I have a few torn pictures of my family and the new one
with my sister’s baby, but that’s all. I’ve never even thought of keeping a journal or writing
things down. . . . I feel like you make so much more sense now.”
    This was the center of who he was. I could feel the things that were permanent, such as
his constant confinement in the palace and the brief bits of traveling. But there were also
elements that shifted. The girls and I were on the wall so much because we’d taken over his
world. Even as we left, we weren’t really gone.
    I stepped over and laced an arm behind his back. He did the same to me, and we stood
there quietly for a minute, taking it all in. And then something that should have been obvious
the whole time suddenly came to me.
    “Maxon?”
    “Yes?”
    “If things were different and you weren’t the prince, and you could pick what you did for a
living, would this be it?” I pointed to the collage.
    “Taking pictures, you mean?”
    “Yes.”
    He barely needed a second to think. “Absolutely. For art or even just family portraits. I’d
do advertising, pretty much whatever I could. I’m very passionate about it. I think you can see
that though.”
    “I can.” I smiled, happy with this knowledge.
    “Why do you ask?”
    “It’s just . . .” I moved to look at him. “You’d be a Five.”
    Maxon slowly took in my words, and he smiled quietly. “That makes me happy.”
    “Me, too.”
    Suddenly, decisively, Maxon faced me, taking my hands in his.
    “Say it, America. Please. Tell me you love me, that you want to be mine alone.”
    “I can’t be yours alone with all the other girls here.”
    “And I can’t send them home until I’m sure of your feelings.”
    “And I can’t give you what you want while I know that tomorrow you could be doing this
with Kriss.”
    “Doing what with Kriss? She’s already seen my room, I told you.”
    “Not that. Just pulling her away, making her feel like . . .”
    He waited. “How?” he whispered.
    “Like she’s the only one who matters. She’s crazy about you. She’s told me so. And I don’t
think it’s one-sided.”
    He sighed, searching for the words. “I can’t tell you she means nothing. I can tell you that
you mean more.”
    “How am I supposed to be sure of that if you can’t send her home?”
    A devilish smirk came to his face. He moved his lips to my ear. “I can think of a few other
ways to show you how you make me feel,” he whispered.
    I swallowed, both frightened and hopeful he’d say more. His body was now up against
mine, his hand low on my back, holding me to him. The other hand pushed my hair off my
neck. I trembled as he ran his open lips over a tiny patch of skin, his breath so very tempting.
    It was as if I forgot how to use my limbs. I couldn’t hold on to him or think of how to
move. But Maxon took care of that, backing me up a few steps so I was pressed against his
collection of pictures.
    “I want you, America,” he murmured into my ear. “I want you to be mine alone. And I
want to give you everything.” His lips kissed their way across my cheek, stopping at the
corner of my mouth. “I want to give you things you didn’t know you wanted. I want”—he
breathed into me—“so desperately to—”
    A loud knock came at the door.
    I was so lost in Maxon’s touch and words and scent that the sound was jarring. We both
turned toward the door, but Maxon quickly put his lips back on mine.
    “Don’t move. I fully intend to finish this conversation.” He kissed me slowly, then pulled
away.
    I stood there gasping for air. I told myself this was probably a bad idea, to let him kiss me
into a confession. But, I reasoned, if there was ever a way to cave, this was it.
    He opened the door, shielding me from the visitor. I ran my hands through my hair, trying
to pull myself together.
    “Sorry, Your Majesty,” someone said. “We’re looking for Lady America, and her maids said
she would be with you.”
    I wondered how my maids had guessed, but I was pleased they seemed so in tune with
me. Maxon’s brow furrowed as he looked toward me and opened the door all the way to allow
the guard to walk through. He came in, and his eyes had the air of inspecting me, like he was
double-checking. Once he was satisfied, he leaned over Maxon’s shoulder and whispered
something.
    Maxon’s shoulders slumped, and he brought his hand to his eyes as if he was unable to
deal with the news.
    “Are you all right?” I asked, not wanting him to suffer alone.
    He turned toward me, sympathy in his face. “I’m so sorry, America. I hate to be the one to
tell you this. Your father has died.”
    I didn’t quite understand the words for a minute. But no matter how I arranged them in
my head, they all led to the same unthinkable conclusion.
    And then the room tilted, and Maxon’s expression became urgent. The last thing I felt was
Maxon’s arms keeping me from hitting the floor.
CHAPTER 23

“—UNDERSTAND. SHE’LL WANT TO VISIT her family.”
    “If she does, it can only be for a day at the most. I don’t approve of her, but the people are
fond of her, not to mention the Italians. It would be very inconvenient if she died.”
    I opened my eyes. I was on my bed, but not under my covers. I saw out of the corner of my
eye that Mary was in the room with me.
    The shouting voices were muted, and I realized that was because they were just outside
my door.
    “That won’t be enough. She loved her father dearly; she’ll want time,” Maxon argued.
    I heard something like a fist hitting a wall, and Mary and I both jumped at the sound.
“Fine,” the king huffed. “Four days. That’s it.”
    “What if she decides not to come back? Even though this wasn’t rebel caused, she might
want to stay.”
    “If she’s dumb enough to want that, then good riddance. She was supposed to give me an
answer about those announcements anyway, and if she’s not willing, then she can stay
home.”
    “She said she would. She told me earlier tonight,” Maxon lied. But he knew, didn’t he?
    “About time. As soon as she returns, we’ll get her in the studio. I want this done by the
New Year.” His tone was irritated, even as he got what he wanted.
    There was a pause before Maxon dared to speak. “I want to go with her.”
    “Like hell you will!” King Clarkson yelled.
    “We’re down to four, Father. That girl might be my wife. Am I supposed to send her
alone?”
    “Yes! If she dies, it’s one thing. If you die, it’s a whole other issue. You’re staying here!”
    I thought the fist hitting the wall this time was Maxon’s. “I am not a commodity! And
neither are they! I wish for once you would look at me and see a person.”
    The door opened quickly, and Maxon came in. “I’m so sorry,” he said, walking over and
sitting on the bed. “I didn’t mean to wake you.”
    “Is it real?”
    “Yes, darling. He’s gone.” He gently took my hand, looking pained. “There was a problem
with his heart.”
    I sat up and threw myself into Maxon’s arms. He held me tightly, letting me weep into his
shoulder.
    “Daddy,” I cried. “Daddy.”
    “Hush, darling. It’ll be all right,” Maxon soothed. “You’ll fly out tomorrow morning to go
pay your respects.”
    “I didn’t get to say good-bye. I didn’t . . .”
    “America, listen to me. Your father loved you. He was proud you’d done so well. He
wouldn’t hold this against you.”
    I nodded, knowing he was right. Practically everything my dad had told me since I’d come
here was about how proud he was.
    “This is what you need to do, okay?” he instructed, wiping tears off my cheeks. “You need
to sleep as best as you can. You’ll fly out tomorrow and stay at home for four days with your
family. I wanted to get you more time, but Father is quite insistent.”
    “It’s okay.”
    “Your maids are making an appropriate dress for the funeral, and they’ll pack everything
you need. You’re going to have to take one of them with you, and a few guards. Speaking of
which,” he said, standing to acknowledge the figure standing in the open door. “Officer Leger,
thank you for coming.”
    “Not at all, Your Majesty. I apologize for being out of uniform, sir.”
    Maxon reached out and shook Aspen’s hand. “Least of my concerns right now. I’m sure
you know why you’re here.”
    “I do.” Aspen turned to me. “I’m very sorry for your loss, miss.”
    “Thank you,” I mumbled.
    “With the elevated rebel activity, we’re all concerned about Lady America’s safety,” Maxon
started. “We’ve already had some local officers dispatched to her home and to the sites being
used over the next few days, and there are still palace-trained guards there, of course. But
with her actually in the house, I think we should send more.”
    “Absolutely, Your Majesty.”
    “And you’re familiar with the area?”
    “Very, sir.”
    “Good. You’ll be heading up the team going with her. Pick whomever you like, between six
and eight guards.”
    Aspen raised his eyebrows.
    “I know,” Maxon conceded. “We’re stretched tight right now, but at least three of the
palace guards we’ve sent to her house have already abandoned their posts. And I want her to
be as safe as, if not safer than, she is here.”
    “I’ll take care of it, sir.”
    “Excellent. There will also be a maid going with her; watch her as well.” He turned to me.
“Do you know who you want to go?”
    I shrugged, unable to think straight.
    Aspen spoke on my behalf. “If I may, I know Anne is your head maid, but I remember
Lucy getting along well with your sister and mother. Maybe it would be good for them to see
a friendly face right now.”
    I nodded. “Lucy.”
    “Very good,” Maxon said. “Officer, you don’t have much time. You’ll be leaving after
breakfast.”
    “I’ll get to work, sir. See you in the morning, miss,” Aspen said. I could tell he was having
a hard time keeping his distance, and, in that moment, I wanted nothing more than for him
to comfort me. Aspen really knew my dad, and I wanted someone who understood him like I
did to miss him with me.
    Once Aspen left, Maxon came to sit with me again.
    “One more thing before I go.” He reached for my hands, holding them tenderly.
“Sometimes when you’re upset, you tend to be impulsive.” He looked at me, and I actually
smiled a little at the accusing look in his eyes. “Try to be sensible while you’re away. I need
you to take care of yourself.”
    I rubbed the back of his hands with my thumbs. “I will. I promise.”
   “Thank you.” A sense of peace encircled us, the way it did sometimes. Even though my
world would never be the same now, for that moment, with Maxon holding me, the loss
didn’t ache so much.
   He leaned his head toward mine until our foreheads touched. I heard him draw in a
breath as if he might say something and then change his mind. After a few seconds, he did it
again. Finally, Maxon leaned back and shook his head and kissed my cheek. “Stay safe.”
   Then he left me alone in my sadness.

It was cold in Carolina, the humidity from the ocean coming inland and making the chill in
the air damp. Secretly, I’d hoped for snow, but it didn’t happen. I felt guilty for wanting
anything at all.
    Christmas Day. I’d spent the last few weeks imagining it several different ways. I thought
maybe I’d be here, eliminated and home. We’d all be around our tree, dejected that I wasn’t a
princess but blissfully happy to be together. I’d also considered opening gifts under the
massive tree at the palace, eating myself sick, and laughing with the other girls and Maxon,
for one day every corner of the competition suspended to celebrate.
    Never could I have imagined I’d be bracing myself for the task of putting my father in the
ground.
    As the car pulled up to my street, I started to see the masses. Though people ought to be
home with their families, they instead crowded outside in the cold. I realized they were
hoping to catch a glimpse of me, and I felt a little sick. People pointed as we passed, and some
local news crews took footage.
    The car stopped in front of my house, and the people waiting started cheering. I didn’t
understand. Didn’t they know why I was here? I walked up the cracked sidewalk with Lucy by
my side and six guards surrounding us. No chance was being taken.
    “Lady America!” people called.
    “Can I have your autograph?” someone screamed, and others joined in.
    I kept moving, looking ahead. For once, I felt I could excuse myself from being theirs. I
lifted my head to the lights hanging off the roof. Dad did that. Who was going to take them
down?
    Aspen, at the head of my entourage, knocked on the front door and waited. Another guard
came to answer and he and Aspen spoke quickly before we were allowed inside. It was hard to
get all of us down the hall, but once the space opened into the living room, I immediately felt
something . . . wrong.
    This wasn’t home anymore.
    I told myself I was crazy. Of course this was home. It was just the unfamiliarity of how
this was unfolding. Everyone was here, even Kota. But Dad was gone, so it was only natural
that it wouldn’t seem quite right. And Kenna was holding a baby who I’d never seen in real
life before. I’d have to get used to that.
    And while Mom was in an apron and Gerad was in his pajamas, I was dressed for dinner at
the palace: hair up, sapphires on my ears, and layers of luxurious fabrics draping to my
heeled shoes. It felt as if I wasn’t welcome for a moment.
    But May hopped to her feet and ran to hug me, crying into my shoulder. I held her back. I
remembered that this might be a strange adjustment, but this was the only place I could be
right now. I had to be with my family.
     “America,” Kenna said, standing with her child in her arms. “You look so beautiful.”
     “Thanks,” I muttered, embarrassed.
     She gave me a one-armed hug, and I peeked into the blankets at my sleeping niece. Astra’s
little face was serene as she slept, and every few seconds she’d unclench her tiny fist or fidget
just a bit. She was breathtaking.
     Aspen cleared his throat. “Mrs. Singer, I’m very sorry for your loss.”
     Mom gave him a tired smile. “Thank you.”
     “I’m sorry we’re not here under better circumstances, but with Lady America home, we’re
going to have to be quite diligent about security,” he said, a ring of authority in his voice.
“We’re going to have to ask everyone to stay in this house. I know it’ll be tight, but it’s only
for a few days. And the guards have been provided an apartment nearby so we can rotate
easily. We’re going to try to be as out of the way as possible.
     “James, Kenna, Kota, we’re prepared to leave for your homes to pick up your necessities
whenever you’re ready to go. If you need some time to make a list, that’s fine. We’re on your
schedule.”
     I smiled a little, happy to see Aspen this way. He’d grown so much.
     “I can’t stay away from my studio,” Kota said. “I have deadlines. There are pieces due.”
     Aspen, still professional, answered him. “Any materials you need can come to the studio
here.” He pointed toward our converted garage. “We’ll make as many trips as necessary.”
     Kota crossed his arms and mumbled. “That place is a dump.”
     “Fine,” Aspen said firmly. “The choice is yours. You can either work in the dump, or you
can risk your life at your apartment.”
     The tension in the air was awkward, and very unnecessary at the moment. I decided to
break it. “May, you can sleep with me. Kenna and James can have your room.”
     They nodded.
     “Lucy,” I whispered. “I want you near us. You might have to sleep on the floor, but I want
you close by.”
     She stood a bit taller. “I wouldn’t be anywhere else, miss.”
     “Where am I supposed to sleep?” Kota demanded.
     “With me,” Gerad offered, though he didn’t seem excited about it.
     “Absolutely not!” Kota scoffed. “I’m not sleeping on a bunk bed with a child.”
     “Kota!” I said, stepping away from my sisters and Lucy. “You can sleep on the couch or in
the garage or in the tree house for all I care; but if you don’t check your attitude, I’ll send you
back to your apartment right now! Have some gratitude for the security you’ve been offered.
Need I remind you that tomorrow we’re burying our father? Either stop the bickering or go
home.” I turned on my heel and headed down the hall. Without checking, I knew Lucy was
right behind me, suitcase in hand.
     I opened the door to my room, waiting for her to come in with me. Once her skirts
swished past the frame, I slammed it shut, heaving a sigh.
     “Was that too much?” I asked.
     “It was perfect!” she replied with delight. “You might as well be the princess already, miss.
You’re ready for it.”
CHAPTER 24

THE NEXT DAY PASSED IN a blur of black dresses and hugs. Lots of people I’d never even seen
before came to Dad’s funeral. I wondered if I just didn’t know all his friends or if they were
here because I was.
    A local pastor gave the service, but for security reasons, the family was asked not to stand
and speak. There was a reception, far more elaborate than anything we could have ever hoped
for. Though no one told me so, I was sure Silvia or some other palace employee had a hand in
making this as easy for us and as beautiful as possible. For safety, it was short, but that was
fine with me. I wanted to let him go as painlessly as I could.
    Aspen stayed near me at all times, and I was grateful for his presence. I couldn’t have
trusted anyone with my life as I could him.
    “I haven’t cried since I left the palace,” I said. “I thought I’d be a wreck.”
    “It hits at funny times,” he replied. “I fell apart for a few days after my father died, before I
realized I had to get it together for everyone else’s sake. But sometimes when something
would happen and I’d want to tell my dad about it, the whole thing would hit me in the chest
again, and I’d break down.”
    “So . . . I’m normal?”
    He smiled. “You’re normal.”
    “I don’t know a lot of these people.”
    “They’re all local. We checked identification. It’s probably a bit higher of a number
because of who you are, but I think your dad made a painting for the Hampshires, and I saw
him speaking to Mr. Clippings and Albert Hammers in the market area more than once. It’s
hard to know everything about people close to you, even the people you love the most.”
    I sensed there was something more in that sentence, something I was supposed to
respond to. I just couldn’t right now.
    “We need to get used to this,” he said.
    “To what? Everything feeling awful?”
    “No,” he answered, shaking his head. “Nothing is the same anymore. Everything that ever
made sense is shifting.”
    I laughed humorlessly. “It is, isn’t it?”
    “We’ve got to stop being afraid of the change.” He looked at me, eyes pleading. I couldn’t
help but wonder what change he meant.
    “I’ll confront the change. But not today.” I walked away, embracing more strangers, trying
to comprehend that I couldn’t talk to my dad anymore about how confused I was feeling.

After the funeral, we tried to keep the spirits up. There were presents left over from
Christmas to open since no one had been in the mood for a big gift-giving spree. Gerad was
given special permission to play ball in the house, and Mom spent most of the afternoon next
to Kenna, holding Astra. Kota was beyond pleasing, so we let him go off into the studio
without bothering to check up on him. It was May I worried about the most. She kept saying
her hands wanted to work, but she didn’t want to go into the studio and not see Dad there.
   In an inspired moment, I pulled her and Lucy into my room for some playtime. Lucy was
a willing subject as May brushed out her hair, giggling as the makeup brushes tickled her
cheeks.
    “You do this to me every day!” I complained lightly.
    May really had a talent for arranging hair, her artist’s eyes ready to work with any
medium. While May wore one of the maid uniforms even though it was too big for her, we
put dress after dress on Lucy. We settled on a blue one, long and delicate, pinning it in the
back so it fit.
    “Shoes!” May cried, running to find a matching pair.
    “My feet are too wide,” Lucy complained.
    “Nonsense,” May insisted, and Lucy obediently sat on the bed while May tried the most
bizarre forms of shoe application on the planet.
    Lucy’s feet really were too big, but with every attempt she laughed herself into a stupor at
May’s antics, and I was doubled over watching it all. We were so loud, it was only a matter of
time until someone came to see what was going on.
    After three quick knocks, I heard Aspen’s voice through the door. “Is everything all right
in there, miss?”
    I ran over and opened the door wide. “Officer Leger, look at our masterpiece.” I gave a
wide sweep of my arm toward Lucy, and May pulled her up, her poor bare feet hidden under
the dress.
    Aspen looked at May in her baggy uniform and laughed and then took in Lucy, looking
like a princess. “An amazing transformation,” he said, grinning from ear to ear.
    “Okay, I think we should put your hair all the way up now,” May insisted.
    Lucy rolled her eyes jokingly toward Aspen and me and let May drag her back to the
mirror.
    “Was this your idea?” he asked quietly.
    “Yes. May looked so lost. I had to distract her.”
    “She looks better. And Lucy looks happy, too.”
    “It does as much for me as it does for them. It feels like, if we can do things that are silly
or even just typical, I’ll be okay.”
    “You will be. It’ll take time, but you’ll be okay.”
    I nodded. But then I started thinking about Dad again, and I didn’t want to cry now. I took
a deep breath and moved on.
    “It seems wrong that I’m the lowest caste left in the Selection,” I whispered back to him.
“Look at Lucy. She’s as pretty and sweet and smart as half of the girls who were in that pool
of thirty-five, but this is the best she’ll ever have. A few hours in a borrowed dress. It’s not
right.”
    Aspen shook his head. “I’ve gotten to know all your maids pretty well over the last few
months, and she’s a really special girl.”
    Suddenly a promise I’d made came back to me.
    “Speaking of my maids, I need to talk to you about something,” I said, dropping my voice.
    Aspen stiffened. “Oh?”
    “I know this is awkward, but I need to say it all the same.”
    He swallowed. “Okay.”
    I bashfully looked him in the eye. “Would you ever consider Anne?”
    His expression was strange, as if he was simultaneously relieved and amused. “Anne?” he
whispered incredulously. “Why her?”
    “I think she likes you. And she’s a really sweet girl,” I said, trying to hide the depth of
Anne’s feelings but build her up at the same time.
    He shook his head. “I know you want me to think about the possibility of other people,
but she’s not at all the kind of girl I’d want to be with. She’s so . . . rigid.”
    I shrugged. “I thought Maxon was like that until I got to know him. Besides, I think she’s
had it rough.”
    “So? Lucy’s had it rough, and look at her,” he said, nodding his head toward her laughing
reflection.
    I took a guess. “Did she tell you how she ended up at the palace?”
    He nodded. “I’ve always hated the castes, Mer; you know that. But I’d never heard of them
being manipulated that way, to acquire slaves.”
    I sighed, looking over at May and Lucy, this stolen moment of joy in the middle of sorrow.
    “Prepare yourself for words you thought you’d never hear,” Aspen warned, and I looked up
at him, waiting. “I’m actually really glad Maxon met you.”
    I coughed out something close to a laugh.
    “I know, I know,” he said, rolling his eyes but smiling. “But I don’t think he would have
ever stopped to wonder about the lower castes if it wasn’t for you. I think just you being there
has changed things.”
    We looked at each other for a moment. I remembered our conversation in the tree house,
when he urged me to sign up for the Selection, hoping I’d have a chance for something better.
I didn’t know yet if I’d gotten something better for myself—it was still hard to tell—but the
thought of maybe giving something better to everyone else in Illéa . . . that possibility meant
more to me than I could say.
    “I’m proud of you, America,” Aspen said, looking from me to the girls by the mirror.
“Really proud.” He moved into the hallway, back to his rounds. “Your father would be, too.”
CHAPTER 25

THE NEXT DAY WAS ANOTHER sentence of house arrest. From time to time, I’d hear the floor
creak, and I’d turn my head, thinking that Dad would walk out of the garage, paint in his hair
like always. But knowing that wasn’t going to happen didn’t feel as bad when I could hear
May’s voice or smell Astra’s baby powder. The house felt full, and that was enough for now—
its own kind of comfort.
    I’d decided Lucy shouldn’t wear her uniform while she was here, and after a little
protesting, I wiggled her into some of my old clothes that were too small for me but too big
for May. Since Mom was busy distracting herself by cooking and serving everyone and I’d
decided to tone down my look to sit around the house, Lucy’s main job was to play with May
and Gerad, a task she took on happily.
    We were all gathered in the living room, busying ourselves in our own ways. I had a book
in hand, and Kota was hogging the television, reminding me of Celeste. I smiled, betting she
was doing exactly that now.
    Lucy, May, and Gerad were playing a card game on the floor, each one laughing when they
won a round. Kenna was propped up against James on the couch, and baby Astra was
finishing a bottle in his arms. It was easy to see the exhaustion in his face, but also the
absolute pride in his beautiful wife and daughter.
    It was almost as if nothing had changed. Then I’d see Aspen out of the corner of my eye in
his uniform, standing watch over us, and remember that, in reality, nothing would ever be the
same.
    I heard Mom sniffling before I saw her coming down the hall. I turned my head and
watched her walk toward us, holding a handful of envelopes.
    “How are you feeling, Mom?” I asked.
    “I’m fine. I just can’t believe he’s gone.” She swallowed, forcing herself not to cry again.
    It was strange. There had been so many times when I had doubted Mom’s devotion to
Dad. I’d never caught the glimpses of affection between them that I’d seen in other couples.
Even Aspen, when everything was on the verge of being real but still very much a secret,
showed me he loved me more than Mom did Dad.
    But I could tell that this was more than the worry of raising May and Gerad alone getting
to her, or stress over money. Her husband was gone, and nothing would ever make that right.
    “Kota, could you turn off the TV for a minute? And Lucy, honey, could you take May and
Gerad into America’s room? I have some things to discuss with the others,” she said quietly.
    “Of course, ma’am,” Lucy replied, and turned to May and Gerad. “Let’s go then.”
    May didn’t look happy about being excluded from whatever was going on, but she chose
not to put up a fight. I wasn’t sure if it was because of Mom’s heavy demeanor or her love for
Lucy, but either way I was glad.
    Once they were gone, Mom turned to the rest of us. “You know your father’s condition
was something that ran in the family. I think he could tell he only had a little time left,
because about three years ago, he sat down and started writing these letters to you, to all of
you.” She looked down to the envelopes in her hands.
    “He made me promise that if anything ever happened, I’d give them to you. I have ones
for May and Gerad, but I’m not sure they’re old enough. I haven’t read them or anything.
They were meant for you, so . . . I thought this would be a nice time to read them. This is
Kenna’s,” she said, handing over a letter. “Kota.” He sat up straighter and took his. Mom
walked over to me. “And America.”
    I took my letter, unsure whether I wanted to open it or not. These were my last words
from my father, the good-bye I thought I’d lost. I ran my hand over my name on the
envelope, thinking of my father dashing the pen across it. He dotted the i in my name with
some kind of squiggle. I smiled to myself, trying to guess what made him decide to do that
and not caring at the same time. Maybe he knew I’d need to smile.
    But then I looked at it closer. That little mark had been added later. The ink on my name
had mostly faded, but that scribble was darker, fresher than the rest.
    I flipped over the envelope. The seal had been broken and taped back together.
    I glanced over to Kenna and Kota, who were both diving into the words. They seemed
engrossed, so they hadn’t known that these existed before this moment. That meant either
Mom was lying and had read mine or Dad had opened this again.
    That was all it took for me to decide I had to know what he’d left for me. I carefully picked
at the retaped seal and pulled open the envelope.
    There was a letter on faded paper and then a short, quick note on bright white paper. I
wanted to read the short note, but I was afraid I wouldn’t understand it without reading the
long one first. I pulled out the letter and took in Dad’s words in the sunlight by the window.

America,
   My sweet girl. I’m having a hard time even starting this letter because I feel like there’s so
much to tell you. Though I love all my children equally, you have a special place in my heart.
Kenna and May both lean on your mother, Kota is so independent that Gerad is drawn to
him, but you have always come to me. When you scraped your knees or were picked on by
the upper kids, my arms were always the ones you wanted. It means the world to me to
know that, at least for one of my children, I was their rock.
   But even if you didn’t love me the way that you do, without any sort of worry or
restraint, I’d still be incredibly proud of you. You’re coming into your own as a musician,
and the sounds of you playing your violin or just singing around the house are the loveliest,
most soothing sounds in all the world. I wish I could give you a better stage, America. You
deserve so much more than standing in the shadows at stuffy parties. I keep hoping you’ll be
one of the lucky ones, the breakouts. I think Kota has a chance at it, too. He’s gifted at what
he does. But I feel like Kota would fight for it, and I’m not sure you have that instinct in you.
You were never a cutthroat kind of girl, the way some of the other lowers can be. And that’s
part of why I love you, too.
   You’re good, America. You’d be surprised at how rare that is in this world. I’m not saying
you’re perfect; having dealt with some of your temper tantrums, I know that’s far from the
truth! But you’re kind, and you ache for things to be fair. You’re good, and I suspect you see
things in this world that no one else sees, not even me.
   And I wish I could tell you how much I see.
   As I’ve been writing these letters to your brothers and sisters, I’ve felt the need to pass on
wisdom. I see in them, even in little Gerad, the things in their personalities that could make
every year more difficult if they don’t make the effort to fight against the hardness in life. I
don’t quite feel that urge with you.
    I sense that you won’t let the world push you into a life you don’t want. Maybe I’m
wrong, so let me at least say this: fight, America. You might not want to fight for the things
that most others would fight for, like money or notoriety, but fight all the same. Whatever it
is that you want, America, go after it with all that you have in you.
    If you can do that, if you can keep from letting fear make you settle for second best, then
I can’t ask for anything more from you as a parent. Live your life. Be as happy as you can be,
let go of the things that don’t matter, and fight.
    I love you, kitten. So much that I can’t find the words to say it. I could paint it maybe, but
I can’t fit a canvas in this envelope. Even then it would never do you justice. I love you
beyond paint, beyond melodies, beyond words. And I hope you will always feel that, even
when I’m not around to tell you so.
    Love, Dad

    I wasn’t sure at what point I had started crying, but it was hard to make out the last of the
letter. I wished so badly I’d had a chance to tell him I loved him the same way. And for a
minute there, I could feel it, that warmth of absolute acceptance.
    I looked up and saw that Kenna was crying, too, still trying to make her way through the
letter. Kota looked confused as he flipped past the pages, seeming to go over them again.
    Turning away, I pulled out the little note, hoping it wasn’t nearly as touching as his letter.
I wasn’t sure I could take any more of that today.

America,
   I’m sorry. When we visited, I went to your room and found Illéa’s diary. You didn’t tell
me it was there; I just figured it out. If there’s any trouble from this, the blame is mine. And
I’m sure there will be repercussions because of who I am and because of who I told. I hate to
betray you that way, but trust that I did it hoping that your future and everyone else’s could
be better.
   Look unto the North Star,
   Your everlasting guide.
   Let truth, honor, all that’s right,
   Be always by your side.
   Love you,
   Shalom

    I stood there for several minutes, trying to riddle this out. Repercussions? Who he was
and who he had told? And what was with that poem?
    Slowly, August’s words came back to me, that my display on the Report wasn’t how they
knew the diaries existed and how they knew more of what was inside than I’d exposed. . . .
    Who I am . . . who I told . . . look unto the North Star . . .
    I stared at Dad’s signature and remembered the way he signed the letters he’d sent me at
the palace. I always thought the way he wrote his o’s looked funny. They were eight-point
stars: North Stars.
    The scribble over the i in my name. Did he want it to mean something to me, too? Did it
already mean something because we’d talked to August and Georgia?
    August and Georgia! His compass: eight points. The designs on her jacket weren’t flowers
at all. Both different but absolutely stars. The boy Kriss got at the Convicting. That wasn’t a
cross on his neck.
    This was how they identified their own.
    My father was a Northern rebel.
    I felt as if I’d seen the star in other places. Maybe walking in the market or even in the
palace. Had this been staring me in the face for years?
    Stricken, I looked up; Aspen was waiting there, his eyes holding questions he couldn’t ask
aloud.
    My dad was a rebel. A half-destroyed history book hidden in his room, friends at his
funeral I knew nothing about . . . a daughter named America. If I’d paid attention at all, I
would have seen it years ago.
    “That’s it?” Kota asked, sounding offended. “What the hell am I supposed to do with
that?”
    I turned away from Aspen, focusing on Kota.
    “What’s wrong?” Mom asked, coming back into the room with some tea.
    “Dad’s letter. He left me this house. What am I supposed to do with this dump?” He stood
up, gripping the pages in his hand.
    “Kota, Dad wrote that before you moved out,” Kenna explained, still emotional. “He was
trying to provide for you.”
    “Well, he failed then, didn’t he? When have we ever not been hungry? This house sure as
hell wouldn’t have changed things. I did that for myself.” Kota threw the papers across the
room, and they flitted to the floor haphazardly.
    Running his fingers through his hair, he huffed out a sigh. “Do we have any liquor in this
place? Aspen, go get me a drink,” he demanded, not even looking in Aspen’s direction.
    I turned and saw Aspen’s face as a thousand emotions flickered across it: irritation,
sympathy, pride, acceptance. He started toward the kitchen.
    “Stop!” I commanded. Aspen paused.
    Kota looked up, frustrated. “That’s what he does, America.”
    “No, he doesn’t,” I spat. “You might have forgotten, but Aspen’s a Two now. It would do
you better to get him something to drink. Not just for his status, but for everything he’s been
doing for all of us.”
    A sly smirk fell across Kota’s face. “Huh. Does Maxon know? Does he know this is still
going on?” he asked, waving a lazy finger between the two of us.
    My heart stopped beating.
    “What would he do, you think? The caning thing’s been done, and lots of people say that
girl didn’t get it bad enough for what she did.” Kota placed his satisfied hands on his hips,
staring us down.
    I couldn’t speak. Aspen didn’t either, and I wondered if our silence was helping us or
condemning us.
    Finally Mom broke the silence. “Is it true?”
    I needed to think; I needed to find the right way to explain this. Or a way to fight it,
because really, it wasn’t true . . . not anymore.
    “Aspen, go check on Lucy,” I said. He started walking until Kota protested.
    “No, he stays!”
    I lost it. “I say he goes! Now sit!”
    The tone in my voice, unlike anything I had ever heard before, startled everyone. Mom
plopped down immediately, shocked. Aspen made his way down the hall, and Kota slowly,
begrudgingly sat as well.
    I tried to focus.
    “Yes, before the Selection, I was dating Aspen. We were planning on telling everyone once
we saved up the money to get married. Before I left, we broke it off, and then I met Maxon. I
care about Maxon, and even though Aspen is with me a lot, nothing is happening there.”
Anymore, I amended in my head.
    Then I turned to Kota. “If you think, even for a second, you can twist my past into
something and try to blackmail me with it, think again. You once asked if I told Maxon about
you, and I did. He knows exactly what a spineless, ungrateful jackass you are.”
    Kota pressed his lips together, ready to boil over. I spoke quickly.
    “And you should know that he adores me,” I said grandly. “If you think he’d take your
word over mine, you might be surprised by how quickly my suggestion of putting a cane to
your hands would happen if I chose to make it so. You want to test me?”
    He clenched his fists, clearly debating. If I was right and his hands got injured, that would
be the end of his career.
    “Good,” I said. “And if I hear you say another unkind word about Dad, I might do it
anyway. You were damn lucky to have a father who loved you so much. He left you the house,
and he could have taken it away after you left, but he didn’t. He still had hope for you, which
is more than I can say.”
    I stormed off, heading into my room and slamming the door. I’d forgotten that Gerad,
May, Lucy, and Aspen would be waiting for me there.
    “You were dating Aspen?” May asked.
    I gasped.
    “You were a little loud,” Aspen said.
    I looked to Lucy. There were tears in her eyes. I didn’t want to make her keep another
secret, and clearly it pained her to think about it. She was so honest and loyal, how could I
ask her to choose between me and the family she was sworn to serve?
    “I’ll tell Maxon when we go back,” I said to Aspen. “I thought I was protecting you, I
thought I was protecting myself, but all I’ve been doing is lying. And if Kota knows, then
maybe other people do. I want to be the one to tell him.”
CHAPTER 26

I SPENT THE REST of the day hiding in my room. I didn’t want to see Kota’s accusing face or deal
with Mom’s questions. The worst was Lucy. She looked so sad to find out that I’d kept this
secret from her. I didn’t even want her serving me, and it seemed she was mostly fine with
helping Mom however she could or playing with May.
    I had too much to think about to have her around anyway. I kept rehearsing my speech to
Maxon. I was trying to figure out the best way to confess this news. Should I leave out
anything Aspen and I had done at the palace? If I did and he asked about it, would that be
worse than me admitting to it in the first place?
    And then I would get distracted thinking about Dad, wondering just what he’d said and
done over the years. Were all those people I didn’t know at his funeral really other rebels?
Could there possibly be that many?
    Should I tell Maxon about that? Would he want me if he knew my family had rebel ties? It
seemed as if some of the other Elite were there because of who they were linked to. What if
my link undid me? It seemed unlikely now that we were so close to August, but still.
    I wondered what Maxon was doing now. Working, maybe. Or finding a way to avoid it. I
wasn’t there for him to take walks with or sit with. I wondered if Kriss was taking my place.
    I covered my eyes, trying to think. How was I supposed to get through all this?
    There was a knock on my door. I didn’t know if what was coming would make things
better or worse, but I told the visitor to come in anyway.
    Kenna walked in, and, for the first time since I’d come home, Astra was nowhere in sight.
    “You okay?”
    I shook my head, and the tears came. She walked in and sat beside me on the bed,
wrapping an arm around me.
    “I miss Dad. His letter was so . . .”
    “I know,” she said. “He hardly even spoke when he was here. But he left us with all these
words. Part of me is glad. I don’t know if I would remember it all if he hadn’t written it
down.”
    “Yeah.” In that I had the answer to a question I was afraid to ask. No one else knew Dad
had been a rebel.
    “So . . . you and Aspen?”
    “It’s over, I swear.”
    “I believe you. When you’re on TV, you should see the way you look at Maxon. Even that
other girl, Celeste?” She rolled her eyes.
    I smiled to myself.
    “She tries to look like she’s in love with him, but you can see it’s not real. Or at least not
as real as she wishes it was.”
    I snorted. “You have no idea how right you are on that one.”
    “I was wondering how long that had been happening. With Aspen, I mean.”
    “Two years. It started after you got married and Kota moved out. We’d been meeting in
the tree house about once a week. We were saving up to get married.”
    “You were in love then?”
    Shouldn’t I have been able to answer right away? Shouldn’t I have been able to tell her
that I knew without a doubt that I’d loved Aspen? But now it didn’t really seem that way.
Maybe it was, but time and distance made it look different.
    “I think so. But it doesn’t feel . . .”
    “It doesn’t feel like things with Maxon?” she guessed.
    I shook my head. “It just seems so strange now. For the longest time, Aspen was the only
person I could imagine being with. I was ready to be a Six. And now?”
    “And now you’re five minutes away from being the next princess?” Her deadpan voice
made the whole thing funny, and I laughed with her at the drastic change in my life.
    “Thanks for that.”
    “That’s what sisters are for.”
    I looked into her eyes and sensed that this hurt her somehow. “Sorry I didn’t tell you
sooner.”
    “You’re telling me now.”
    “It wasn’t because I didn’t trust you. It was part of what made it special, I think. Keeping
him a secret.” Saying it out loud, I realized that it was true. Yes, I had feelings for him, but
there were other things that surrounded us that made having Aspen that much sweeter: the
secrecy, the rush of being touched, the thought of having something worth working toward.
    “I understand, America, I really do. I just hope you never felt like you had to keep it a
secret. Because I’m here for you.”
    I exhaled, and so many of my worries seemed to leave with that breath. At least for a
moment. I propped my head on Kenna’s shoulder, and it was nice to be able to think.
    “So, is anything going on between you and Aspen anymore? How does he feel about you?”
    I sighed, sitting up. “He keeps trying to tell me something, something about how he’s
always loved me. And I know I should tell him that it doesn’t matter and that I love Maxon,
but . . .”
    “But?”
    “What if Maxon picks someone else? I can’t walk away from this with nothing. At least if
Aspen still thinks there’s a chance, maybe we could try again when everything’s over.”
    She stared at me. “You’re using Aspen as a safety net?”
    I buried my head in my hands. “I know, I know. It’s awful, isn’t it?”
    “America, you’re better than that. And if you’ve ever cared about him at all, you need to
tell him the truth just as badly as you need to tell Maxon the truth.”
    A knock came at the door. “Come in.”
    I blushed a little as Aspen walked in the doorway, a dejected Lucy close behind.
    “You need to get dressed and packed,” he said.
    “Is something wrong?” I stood up, suddenly tense.
    “All I know is that Maxon wants you back at the palace immediately.”
    I sighed, confused. I was supposed to have one more day. Kenna wrapped her arm around
me again and gave me a tiny squeeze before heading back to the living room. Aspen left, and
Lucy merely grabbed her uniform and went to the bathroom to change, closing the door
behind her.
    Alone again, I thought over everything. Kenna was right. I already knew how I felt about
Maxon, and it was time to do what Dad had told me to do, what I’d meant to be doing this
whole time: I was going to fight.
    And because it felt like the bigger task, I would talk to Maxon first. Once that was settled,
no matter the outcome, then I would figure out what to say to Aspen.
    It had happened so slowly that it took me a while to realize how much we’d changed. But
I’d known for weeks and had still kept my feelings to myself. I had to do the right thing and
tell him so. I had to let go of Aspen.
    I reached into my suitcase, hunting for the bundle at the bottom. Once I found the ball of
fabric, I unrolled it, taking out my jar. The penny wasn’t so lonely in there now with the
bracelet, but that didn’t matter.
    I took the jar and placed it on my windowsill, leaving it where it should have stayed a long
time ago.

I spent the majority of the plane ride going over my confession to Maxon. I was dreading this,
but we could only move forward if he knew the truth.
    I looked up from my comfy seat near the rear of the plane. Aspen and Lucy were sitting
toward the front on opposite sides of the aisle, deep in conversation. Lucy looked upset still,
and she seemed to be giving Aspen some sort of instructions. He was quiet as he took in her
words, nodding at her suggestions. She retreated into her seat, and Aspen stood. I ducked
back, hoping he didn’t notice me spying.
    I tried to look very interested in my book until he approached.
    “The pilot says another half hour or so,” he informed me.
    “All right. Good.”
    He hesitated. “I’m sorry about everything with Kota.”
    “You don’t have anything to be sorry for. He’s just mean.”
    “No, I do. Years ago he teased me for having a crush on you, and I brushed it off; but I
think he saw through it. He must have been paying attention since then. I should have been
more careful or something. I should have—”
    “Aspen.”
    “Yes?”
    “It’ll be fine. I’m going to tell Maxon the truth, and I’m going to take responsibility for
this. You’ve got people at home depending on you. If something happens to you—”
    “Mer, you tried to keep me from this, and I was too stubborn to listen. It’s my fault.”
    “No, it’s not.”
    He took a deep breath. “Listen . . . I need to tell you something. I know it’s going to be
difficult, but you need to know. When I told you I’d always love you, I meant it. And I—”
    “Stop,” I pleaded. I knew I had to tell him the truth, but I could only deal with one
confession at a time. “I can’t handle this right now. I just had my world turned upside down,
and I’m about to do something I’m terrified to do. I need you to give me some room right
now.”
    Aspen didn’t look happy with this decision, but he let me make it all the same.
    “As you wish, my lady.” He walked away, and I felt even worse than I had before.
CHAPTER 27

WALKING BACK INTO THE PALACE felt impossibly right. A maid I’d never seen before was there to
take my coat, and Aspen was next to a guard, explaining quietly that he’d give a full report on
the trip in the morning. I started up the stairs, but another maid stopped me.
   “Don’t you want to go to the reception, miss?”
   “Excuse me?” Was I supposed to have some fantastic homecoming or something?
   “In the Women’s Room, my lady. I’m sure they’re waiting for you.”
   That was less of an explanation than I was hoping for, but I climbed back down the stairs
and headed around the corner to the Women’s Room. Strolling down the familiar halls was
more comforting than I could have imagined. Of course I still missed my dad, but it was nice
not to see things that made me think of him everywhere I turned. The only thing that would
have made this homecoming better was Maxon walking here with me.
   I was toying with the possibility of sending for him when I heard the wild noise coming
from the Women’s Room. I was confused by the sound. By the volume, half of Illéa was
waiting in there.
   Tentatively, I opened the door. The second Tiny—what was she doing here?—caught a
glimpse of my hair, she called out to the room.
   “She’s here! America’s back!”
   The room exploded with cheers, and I was so confused. Emmica, Ashley, Bariel . . .
everyone was here. I hunted, but I knew it was pointless. Marlee wouldn’t be invited to this.
   I was rushed by Celeste, who embraced me tightly. “Ahh, you bitch, I knew you’d make it!”
   “What?” I asked.
   She didn’t get her words out fast enough. A split second later, Kriss was hugging me and
half screaming in my ear. The smell on her breath said she’d been drinking quite a bit, and
the glass in her hand confirmed she wasn’t planning on stopping.
   “It’s us!” she yelled. “Maxon’s announcing his engagement tomorrow! It’s one of us!”
   “Are you sure?”
   “Elise and I got the boot last night, but he sent for all the girls to come back and celebrate,
so we stayed,” Celeste confirmed. “Elise isn’t taking it well; you know how it is with her
family. She thinks she failed.”
   “What about you?” I asked nervously.
   She shrugged and smiled. “Eh.”
   I laughed at that, and a moment later a drink was shoved in my hand.
   “To Kriss and America, the last girls standing!” someone yelled.
   I was dizzy with the news. He’d decided to end it, to send everyone home. And he did it
while I was away. Did that mean he missed me? Did that mean he realized he was fine
without me?
   “Drink!” Celeste insisted, tipping the glass back for me. I downed the champagne and
came up coughing. Between the jet lag, the emotional stress of the last few days, and the
sudden intake of alcohol, I was immediately giddy.
   I watched as girls danced on the couches, celebrating even though they had lost. Celeste
was in a corner with Anna; it looked as if she was apologizing repeatedly for her actions. Elise
crept in quietly and came to offer me a hug before retreating again. It was a blur of
excitement, and I found myself happy even though I wasn’t totally certain of the outcome in
front of me.
    I turned around, and Kriss was suddenly there, embracing me.
    “Okay,” she said. “Let’s promise that tomorrow, no matter what, we’ll be happy for each
other.”
    “I think that’s a good plan,” I shouted over the din. I laughed and lowered my eyes. In that
quick second, a serious realization flooded me. That flash of silver on her neck suddenly
meant so much more than it had a few days ago.
    I sucked in a breath, and she looked at me with an expression that asked what was wrong.
Even though it was rude and abrupt, I pulled her out of the room and down the hall.
    “Where are we going?” she asked. “America, what’s wrong?”
    I dragged her around the corner and into the ladies’ bathroom, double-checking to make
sure we were alone before speaking.
    “You’re a rebel,” I accused.
    “What?” she said, a little too rehearsed. “You’re crazy.” But her hand fluttered to her neck,
giving her away.
    “I know what that star means, Kriss, so don’t lie to me,” I said calmly.
    After a calculated pause she sighed. “I haven’t done anything illegal. I’m not mounting
protests anywhere; I just support the cause.”
    “Fine,” I spat. “But how much of your part in the Selection is you wanting Maxon and how
much is your group wanting one of their own on the throne?”
    She was quiet for a moment, choosing her words. Clenching her jaw, she walked over to
the door and locked it. “If you must know, yes, I was . . . presented to the king as an option.
I’m sure you’ve guessed by now that the lottery was a joke.”
    I nodded.
    “The king was—and still is—unaware of how many Northerners were promoted while the
choice was being made. I was the only one of all the hopefuls to make it through, and, at first,
I was completely dedicated to my cause. I didn’t understand Maxon, and it didn’t seem like he
wanted me at all. But then I got to know him, and I was really sad about him not taking an
interest in me. After Marlee left and you lost your hold on him, I saw him in a totally new
light.
    “You might think that my motives for coming here were wrong, and maybe you’re right.
But my reasons for being here now are completely different. I love Maxon, and I’m still
fighting for him. And we can do great things together. So if you’re thinking about trying to
blackmail me or sell me out, forget it. I’m not backing down. Do you understand me?”
    Kriss had never spoken so forcefully, and I didn’t know if the reason was her absolute
faith in her words or the heavy amount of champagne. She looked so fierce at the moment, I
wasn’t sure what to say.
    I wanted to tell her that Maxon and I could do great things, too, that we’d probably already
done more than she could guess. But now wasn’t the time to brag. Besides, she and I had a lot
in common. I came here for my family; she came here for a family of sorts. That got us
through the doorway and into Maxon’s heart. What good would it do us to tear each other
apart now?
    She took my silence as an agreement to behave, and she relaxed her stance.
    “Good. Now, if you’ll excuse me, I’m going back to the party.”
    Giving me a cold stare, she swept out of the room, leaving me torn. Should I keep my
mouth shut? Should I at least let someone know? Was this even a bad thing?
    I sighed and left the bathroom. I wasn’t in the mood to celebrate anymore, so I took the
back stairway up to my room.
    Even though I wanted to see Anne and Mary, I was glad no one was there. I flopped onto
the bed and tried to think. So Kriss was a rebel. Nothing dangerous, according to her, but I
still wondered what that meant exactly. She must be who August and Georgia were talking
about. What had ever made me think it was Elise?
    Had Kriss helped them get into the palace? Had she pointed them in the direction of
things they had been looking for? I had my secrets in the palace, but I’d never stopped to
think about what the other girls could be hiding. I should have though.
    Because what could I say now? If there was something real between Maxon and Kriss, any
attempt to expose her would look like a desperate last effort to win. And even if that worked,
that wasn’t how I wanted to get Maxon.
    I wanted him to know I loved him.
    A knock came at the door, and I considered not answering it. If it was Kriss coming to
explain more or one of the girls trying to drag me downstairs, that wasn’t anything I wanted
to deal with. Eventually, I heaved myself upright and went to the door.
    Maxon stood there with a stuffed envelope and a small, gift-wrapped package.
    In the second it took us to register that we were in the same place again, it felt as if the
whole space charged with a magical kind of electricity, making me acutely aware of just how
much I missed him.
    “Hi,” he said. He seemed a little stunned, as if he couldn’t think of anything more to say.
    “Hi.”
    We stared.
    “Do you want to come in?” I offered.
    “Oh. Um, yes, I do.” Something was off. He was different, nervous maybe.
    I stood aside, making room for him to enter. He looked around the space as if it had
changed somehow since the last time he saw it.
    He turned to gaze at me. “How are you feeling?”
    I realized he probably meant about my dad, and I reminded myself that the end of the
Selection wasn’t the only shift in my world right now. “Okay. It doesn’t really feel like he’s
gone, especially now that I’m here. I feel like I could write him a letter, and he’d still get it.”
    He gave me a sympathetic smile. “How’s your family?”
    I sighed. “Mom is holding it together, and Kenna is a rock. It’s mostly May and Gerad I’m
worried about. Kota couldn’t have been any meaner about the whole thing. It’s like he didn’t
love him at all, and I don’t understand that,” I confessed. “You met my dad. He was so sweet.”
    “He was,” Maxon agreed. “I’m glad I at least got to meet him. I can see bits of him in you,
you know.”
    “Really?”
    “Absolutely!” He put his parcels in one hand, holding me with his free one. He walked me
over to the bed, sitting next to me. “Your sense of humor, for one. And your tenacity. When
he and I spoke during his visit, he grilled me. It was nerve-racking, but kind of funny at the
same time. You’ve never just let me off the hook either.
    “Of course, you have his eyes and I think his nose, too. And I can see your optimism
beaming out sometimes. He gave me that impression as well.”
    I soaked up the words, holding on to all the parts of me that were like him. And here I
thought Maxon didn’t know him.
    “All I’m saying is, it’s okay to be sad about this, but you can be sure the best of him is still
around,” he concluded.
    I threw my arms around him, and he held me with his free hand. “Thank you.”
    “I mean it.”
    “I know you do. Thanks.” I moved back beside him and decided to change the subject
before I got too emotional. “What’s this all about?” I asked, nodding toward his full hand.
    “Oh.” Maxon fumbled with his thoughts a moment. “These are for you. A late Christmas
present.”
    He held up the envelope, thick with folded papers. “I can’t believe I’m actually giving this
to you, and you have to wait to look at them until I’m not here, but . . . it’s for you to keep.”
    “Okay,” I said questioningly as he set the envelope on my bedside table.
    “This is a little less embarrassing,” he added playfully, handing me the gift. “Sorry the
wrapping is so bad.”
    “It’s fine,” I lied, trying not laugh at the crooked seams and tearing at the paper on the
back.
    Inside, the gift was a frame holding a picture of a house. Not just any house, but a
beautiful one. It was a warm yellow color with plush grass that I wanted to put my feet in just
from looking at the print. The windows were tall and wide on both stories, with trees offering
shade to a section of the lawn. One tree even had a swing hanging from it.
    I tried not to look at the house but at the photo itself. I was sure that this little piece of art
was something Maxon made himself, though I couldn’t guess when he’d gotten out of the
palace to find its subject.
    “It’s beautiful,” I admitted. “Did you take it yourself?”
    “Oh, no.” He laughed, shaking his head. “The picture isn’t the gift; the house is.”
    I tried to let that sink in. “What?”
    “I thought you’d want your family close by. It’s a short drive away, with plenty of room.
Your sister and her little family would even be comfortable there, I think.”
    “Wha . . . I . . .” I stared at him, searching for clarification.
    Patient as ever, Maxon gave me the explanation he thought I already understood. “You
told me to send everyone home. I did. I had to keep one other girl—those are the rules—but . .
. you said that if I could prove I loved you . . .”
    “. . . It’s me?”
    “Of course it’s you.”
    I was speechless. I laughed in shock and started giving him kisses and giggling between
each one. Maxon, so pleased with the affection, took every kiss and laughed along with me.
    “We’re getting married?” I yelled, kissing him again.
    “Yes, we’re getting married.” He chuckled and let me attack him in my excitement. I
realized then that I was in his lap. I didn’t remember getting there.
    I kissed him on and on . . . and somewhere in there the laughing stopped. After a while,
the smiling dwindled. The kisses turned from playful to something much deeper. When I
pulled away and looked into his eyes, they were intense, focused.
    Maxon held me close, and I could feel his heart racing against my chest. Guided by a deep
hunger for him, I pushed his suit coat down his back, and he helped me as best as he could
while holding on to me. I let my shoes fall to the floor, thudding a little song on their way
down. I felt Maxon’s legs shift underneath me as he slipped his off as well.
    Without breaking our kiss, he lifted me, crawling deeper onto the bed and laying me down
gently somewhere near the middle. His lips traveled down my neck as I loosened his tie,
throwing it somewhere near our shoes.
    “You’re breaking a lot of rules, Miss Singer.”
    “You’re the prince. You can just pardon me.”
    He chuckled darkly, his lips at my throat, my ear, my cheek. I untucked his shirt, fumbling
with the buttons. He helped with the last few, sitting up to toss it aside. The last time I’d seen
Maxon without his shirt on, I didn’t get to really appreciate it because of the circumstance.
But now . . .
    I ran my fingers lightly down his stomach, admiring how strong he was. When my hand
got to his belt, I gripped it and pulled him back down. He came willingly, dragging a hand up
my leg, resting it comfortably on my thigh underneath the layers of my dress.
    I was going crazy, wanting so much more of him, aching to know if he’d let me have it.
Without even thinking, I reached around and dug my fingers into his back.
    Immediately, he stopped kissing me, pulling back to look at me.
    “What?” I whispered, terrified to break this moment.
    “Does it . . . does it repulse you?” he asked nervously.
    “What do you mean?”
    “My back.”
    I ran a hand down his cheek, staring directly into his eyes, wanting to leave him with no
doubt about how I felt.
    “Maxon, some of those marks are on your back so they wouldn’t be on mine, and I love
you for them.”
    He stopped breathing for a second. “What did you say?”
    I smiled. “I love you.”
    “One more time, please? I just—”
    I took his face in both of my hands. “Maxon Schreave, I love you. I love you.”
    “And I love you, America Singer. With all that I am, I love you.”
    He kissed me again, and I let my hands move to his back, and this time he didn’t pause.
He moved his hands beneath me, and I felt his fingers playing with the back of my dress.
    “How many damn buttons does this thing have?” he complained.
    “I know! It’s—”
    Maxon sat up, placing his hands along the bust line of my dress. With one firm pull, he
ripped my dress down the front, exposing the slip underneath.
    There was a charged silence as Maxon took that in. Slowly, his eyes returned to mine.
Without breaking that contact, I sat up, sliding the sleeves of my dress down my back. It took
a little bit of work to get it all off; and, by the end of it, Maxon and I were kneeling on my bed,
my hardly covered chest pressed to his, kissing slowly.
    I wanted to stay up all night with him, to explore this new feeling we’d discovered. It felt
as if everything else in the world was gone . . . until we heard a crash in the hall. Maxon
stared at the door, seeming to expect it to burst open at any second. He was tense, more
frightened than I’d ever seen him.
    “It’s not him,” I whispered. “It’s probably one of the girls stumbling to her room, or a maid
cleaning something. It’s okay.”
    He finally released a breath I didn’t see he was holding and fell back onto the bed. He
draped an arm over his eyes, frustrated or exhausted or maybe both.
    “I can’t, America. Not like this.”
    “But it’s okay, Maxon. We’re safe here.” I lay down beside him, cuddling onto his free
shoulder.
    He shook his head. “I want to let all the walls down with you. You deserve that. And I can’t
now.” He looked over to me. “I’m sorry.”
    “It’s okay.” But I couldn’t hide my disappointment.
    “Don’t be sad. I want to take you on a proper honeymoon. Someplace warm and private.
No duties, no cameras, no guards.” He wrapped his arms around me. “It will be so much
better that way. And I can really spoil you.”
    It didn’t sound so bad to wait when he put it that way, but as always, I pushed back. “You
can’t spoil me, Maxon. I don’t want anything.”
    We were nose to nose by then. “Oh, I know. I don’t intend on giving you things. Well,” he
amended, “I do intend on giving you things, but that’s not what I mean. I’m going to love you
more than any man has ever loved a woman, more than you ever dreamed you could be loved.
I promise you that.”
    The kisses that followed were sweet and hopeful, like our first ones. I could feel it, the
promise he’d just made, starting now. And I was afraid and excited by the possibility of being
loved so much.
    “Maxon?”
    “Yes?”
    “Would you stay with me tonight?” I asked. Maxon raised an eyebrow, and I giggled. “I’ll
behave, I promise. Just . . . would you sleep here?”
    He looked to the ceiling, debating. Finally he caved. “I will. But I’ll need to leave early.”
    “Okay.”
    “Okay.”
    Maxon took off his pants and socks, neatly stacking his clothes so they wouldn’t be too
wrinkled in the morning. He crawled back into the bed, snuggling up with his stomach
against my back. One of his arms he laced under my neck and the other he gently wrapped
around me.
    I loved my bed at the palace. The pillows were like clouds, and the mattress cradled me
into it. I was never too warm or too cold under my covers, and the feeling of my nightgown
against my skin was almost as if I was wearing air.
    But I’d never felt so settled as I did with Maxon’s arms around me.
    He placed a gentle kiss behind my ear. “Sleep well, my America.”
    “I love you,” I said quietly.
    He held me a little tighter. “I love you.”
    I lay there, letting the happiness of the moment sink into me. It seemed only seconds
later that Maxon’s breathing was slow and steady. He was already asleep.
    Maxon never slept.
    I must have made him feel safer than I’d imagined. And, after all my worries about how
his father acted toward me, he made me feel safe, too.
    I sighed, promising myself that we’d talk about Aspen tomorrow. It would need to happen
before the ceremony, and I felt sure I knew how to explain things in the best way. For now, I
would enjoy this tiny bubble of peace and rest securely in the arms of the man I loved.
CHAPTER 28

I WOKE TO THE FEELING of Maxon sliding an arm around me. Somewhere in the night, I ended
up with my head on his chest, and the slow sound of his heartbeat was echoing in my ear.
    Without a word, he kissed my hair and went to hold me closer. I couldn’t believe this was
happening. I was here with Maxon, together, waking up in my bed. This morning he would be
giving me a ring. . . .
    “We could wake up like this every day,” he mumbled.
    I giggled. “You’re reading my mind.”
    He sighed contentedly. “How are you feeling, my dear?”
    “I feel like punching you for calling me ‘my dear’ mostly.” I poked his bare stomach.
    Smiling, he crawled to sit over me. “Fine then. My darling? My pet? My love?”
    “Any of those would work, so long as you’ve reserved it solely for me,” I said, my hands
mindlessly wandering his chest, his arms. “What am I supposed to call you?”
    “Your Royal Husbandness. It’s required by law, I’m afraid.” His own hands glided over my
skin, finding a delicate spot on my neck.
    “Don’t!” I said, shying away.
    His responding smile was triumphant. “You’re ticklish!”
    Despite my protests, he started running his fingers all over me, making me shriek at the
playful touching.
    Nearly as quickly as I began squealing, I stopped. A guard rushed through the door, gun
drawn.
    This time I screamed, pulling up the sheet to cover myself. I was so frightened that it took
me a moment to realize the determined eyes of the guard belonged to Aspen. It felt as if my
face caught on fire, I was so humiliated.
    Aspen looked stricken. He couldn’t even put a sentence together as his eyes flashed back
and forth between Maxon in his underwear and me draped in a sheet to cover mine.
    My shock was finally broken by a deep laugh.
    For as terrified as I was, Maxon was the picture of ease. In fact, he seemed pleased at
being caught. His voice was a little smug as he spoke. “I assure you, Leger, she’s perfectly
safe.”
    Aspen cleared his throat, unable to look either of us in the eye. “Of course, Your Majesty.”
He bowed and left, closing the door behind him.
    I fell over, moaning into my pillow. I would never live that down. I should have told Aspen
how I felt on the plane when I had the chance.
    Maxon came to hug me. “Don’t be so embarrassed. It’s not as if we were naked. And it’s
bound to happen in the future.”
    “It’s so humiliating,” I wailed.
    “To be caught in bed with me?” The pain in his voice was clear. I sat up and faced him.
    “No! It’s not you. It’s just, I don’t know, this was supposed to be private.” I ducked my
head and played with a piece of the blanket.
    Tenderly, Maxon stroked my cheek. “I’m sorry.” I looked up at him, his voice too sincere
to ignore. “I know it’s going to be hard for you, but people will always be looking at our lives
now. For the first few years, there will probably be a lot of interference. All the kings and
queens have had only children. Some by choice, I’m sure; but after the difficulty my mother
had, they’ll want to make sure we can even have a family.”
    He stopped talking, his eyes having moved from my face to a spot on the bed.
    “Hey,” I said, cupping his cheek. “I’m one of five, remember? I have really good genes in
that department. It’ll be all right.”
    He gave me a weak smile. “I really hope so. Partly because, yes, we’re duty bound to
produce heirs. But also . . . I want everything with you, America. I want the holidays and the
birthdays, the busy seasons and lazy weekends. I want peanut butter fingerprints on my desk.
I want inside jokes and fights and everything. I want a life with you.”
    Suddenly the last few minutes were erased from my mind. The growing warmth in my
chest was pushing everything else away.
    “I want that, too,” I assured him.
    He smiled. “How about we make it official in a few hours?”
    I shrugged. “I guess I don’t have any other plans today.”
    Maxon tackled me on the bed, covering me with kisses. I would have let him kiss me like
that for hours, but Aspen seeing us together was enough. There was no way I’d be able to stop
my maids from gushing if they saw this.
    He got dressed, and I pulled on my robe. It should have felt funny, maybe, this little
moment in the afterward. All I could think about, though, as I watched Maxon cover his scars
with his shirt, was how incredible this was. This thing I’d never wanted to happen was
making me so happy.
    Maxon gave me one last kiss before opening the door and heading on his way. It was
harder to part with him than I thought it would be. I told myself it was only for a few hours
and that the wait would be so worth it.
    Before I closed the door, I heard Maxon whisper, “The lady would appreciate your
discretion, officer.”
    There was no response, but I could imagine Aspen’s solemn nod. I stood behind the closed
door, debating what to say, wondering if I should even say anything. Minutes passed, but I
knew I had to face Aspen. I couldn’t move forward with everything that was going to happen
today without talking to him first. I drew in a breath and nervously opened the door. He tilted
his head toward the hallway listening for voices. Finally Aspen turned his accusing eyes my
way, and the weight of his stare broke me.
    “I’m so sorry,” I breathed.
    He shook his head. “It’s not as if I didn’t know it was coming. It was just a shock.”
    “I should have told you,” I said, stepping into the hall.
    “It doesn’t matter. I just can’t believe you slept with him.”
    I put my hands on his chest. “I didn’t, Aspen. I swear.”
    And then, at the last possible moment, everything was ruined.
    Maxon stepped around the corner, holding Kriss by the hand. His eyes locked on to me,
body pressed into Aspen with the intensity of my defense. I backed away, but not quickly
enough. Aspen turned to face Maxon, prepared to give an excuse but still too stunned to
speak.
    Kriss’s mouth dropped open, and she quickly covered it with a hand. Looking into
Maxon’s shocked eyes, I shook my head, trying to explain without words that this was all a
misunderstanding.
    It was only a second before Maxon regained his cool demeanor. “I found Kriss in the hall
and was coming to explain my choice to you both before the cameras showed up, but it seems
we have other things to discuss.”
    I looked at Kriss and was at least consoled by the fact that there was no triumph in her
eyes. On the contrary, she looked sad for me.
    “Kriss, would you please return to your room? Quietly?” Maxon instructed.
    She curtsied and disappeared down the hall, eager to get away from the situation. Maxon
took a deep breath before looking at us again.
    “I knew it,” he said. “I told myself I was crazy, because surely you would have told me if I
was right. You were supposed to be honest with me.” He rolled his eyes. “I cannot believe I
didn’t trust myself. From that first meeting, I knew it. The way you looked at him, how
distracted you were. That damn bracelet you wore, the note on the wall, all those times when
I thought I had you and then suddenly lost you again . . . it was you,” he said, turning to
Aspen.
    “Your Majesty, this is my fault,” Aspen lied. “I pursued her. She made it perfectly clear
that she had no intentions of being in a relationship with anyone but you, but I went after her
anyway.”
    Without responding to Aspen’s excuses, he walked right up to him, looking him in the eye.
“What’s your name? Your first name?”
    He swallowed. “Aspen.”
    “Aspen Leger,” he said, testing the words. “Get out of my sight before I send you to New
Asia to die.”
    Aspen’s breath caught. “Your Majesty, I—”
    “GO!”
    Aspen looked at me once, then turned and walked away.
    I stood there, silent and still, afraid to risk a peek into Maxon’s eyes. When I finally did,
he nudged his chin toward my room, and I went in, with him following me. I turned to see
him close the door and run his hand through his hair one time. He moved to face me, and I
saw his eyes catch on the unmade bed. He laughed humorlessly to himself.
    “How long?” he asked quietly, still in control.
    “Do you remember that fight—” I started.
    Maxon erupted. “We’ve been fighting since the day we met, America! You’ll have to be
more specific!”
    I shook where I stood. “After Kriss’s party.”
    His eyes widened. “So basically since he got here,” he said, something like sarcasm in his
voice.
    “Maxon, I’m so sorry. At first I was protecting him, and then I was protecting myself. And
after Marlee was caned, I was afraid to tell you the truth. I couldn’t lose you,” I pleaded.
    “Lose me? Lose me?” he asked, astonished. “You’re going home with a small fortune, a
new caste, and a man who is still pursuing you! I’m the one losing here today, America!”
    The words took my breath away. “I’m going home?”
    He looked at me as if I was an idiot for asking. “How many times am I supposed to let you
break my heart, America? Do you think I’d honestly marry you, make you my princess, when
you’ve been lying to me for most of our relationship? I refuse to torture myself for the rest of
my life. You might have noticed, I get plenty of that already.”
    I erupted into sobs. “Maxon, please. I’m sorry; it’s not what it looked like. I s-swear. I love
you!”
    He sauntered up to me, his eyes dead. “Of all the lies you’ve told me, that’s the one I
resent the most.”
    “It’s not—” The look in his eyes silenced me.
    “Have your maids do their best. You should go out in style.”
    He walked past me, out the doorway and out of the future I’d held in my hands only a few
minutes before. I turned back to the room, holding my stomach as if the core of my body was
about to crack from the pain. I went over to the bed, rolling onto my side, no longer able to
stand.
    I cried, hoping to get the ache out of my body before the ceremony. How was I supposed
to face that? I looked to the clock to see how much time I had . . . and saw the thick envelope
Maxon had given me last night.
    I decided this was the last piece of him I would ever have, so I opened the seal, desperate.
CHAPTER 29

December 25, 4:30 p.m.
Dear America,
     It’s been seven hours since you left. Twice now I’ve started to go to your room to ask how
you liked your presents and then remembered you weren’t here. I’ve gotten so used to you,
it’s strange that you aren’t around, drifting down the halls. I’ve nearly called a few times,
but I don’t want to seem possessive. I don’t want you to feel like I’m a cage to you. I
remember how you said the palace was just that the first night you came here. I think, over
time, you’ve felt freer, and I’d hate to ruin that freedom. I’m going to have to distract myself
until you come back.
     I decided to sit and write to you, hoping maybe it would feel like I was talking to you. It
sort of does. I can imagine you sitting here, smiling at my idea, maybe shaking your head at
me as if to say I’m being silly. You do that sometimes, did you know? I like that expression
on you. You’re the only person who wears it in a way that doesn’t come across like you think
I’m completely hopeless. You smile at my idiosyncrasies, accept that they exist, and continue
to be my friend. And, in seven short hours, I’ve started to miss that.
     I wonder what you’ve done in that time. I’m betting by now you’ve flown across the
country, made it to your home, and are safe. I hope you are safe. I can’t imagine what a
comfort you must be to your family right now. The lovely daughter has finally returned!
     I keep trying to picture your home. I remember you telling me it was small, that you had
a tree house, and that your garage was where your father and sister did all their work.
Beyond that I’ve had to resort to my imagination. I imagine you curled up in a hug with
your sister or kicking around a ball with your little brother. I remember that, you know?
That you said he liked to play ball.
     I tried to imagine walking into your house with you. I would have liked that, to see you
where you grew up. I would love to see your brother run around or be embraced by your
mother. I think it would be comforting to sense the presence of people near you, floorboards
creaking and doors shutting. I would have liked to sit in one part of the house and still
probably be able to smell the kitchen. I’ve always imagined that real homes are full of the
aromas of whatever’s being cooked. I wouldn’t do a scrap of work. Nothing having to do
with armies or budgets or negotiations. I’d sit with you, maybe try to work on my
photography while you played the piano. We’d be Fives together, like you said. I could join
your family for dinner, talking over one another in a collection of conversations instead of
whispering and waiting our turns. And maybe I’d sleep in a spare bed or on the couch. I’d
sleep on the floor beside you if you’d let me.
     I think about that sometimes. Falling asleep next to you, I mean, like we did in the safe
room. It was nice to hear your breaths as they came and went, something quiet and close,
keeping me from feeling so alone.
     This letter has gotten foolish, and I think you know how I detest looking like a fool. But
still I do. For you.
     Maxon
December 25, 10:35 p.m.
Dear America,
    It’s nearly bedtime, and I’m trying to relax, but I can’t. All I can think about is you. I’m
terrified you’re going to get hurt. I know someone would tell me if you weren’t all right, and
that has led to its own kind of paranoia. If anyone comes up to me to deliver a message, my
heart stops for a moment, fearing the worst: You are gone. You’re not coming back.
    I wish you were here. I wish I could just see you.
    You are never getting these letters. It’s too humiliating.
    I want you home. I keep thinking of your smile and worrying that I’ll never see it again.
    I hope you come back to me, America.
    Merry Christmas.
    Maxon

December 26, 10:00 a.m.
Dear America,
    Miracle of miracles, I’ve made it through the night. When I finally woke up, I convinced
myself I was worried for nothing. I vowed that I would focus on work today and not fret so
much about you.
    I got through breakfast and most of a meeting before thoughts of you consumed me. I
told everyone I was sick and am now hiding in my room, writing to you, hoping this will
make me feel like you’re home again.
    I’m so selfish. Today you will bury your father, and all I can think of is bringing you
here. Having written that out, seeing it in ink, I feel like an absolute ass. You are exactly
where you need to be. I think I already said this, but I’m sure you’re such a comfort to your
family.
    You know, I haven’t told this to you and I ought to have, but you’ve gotten so much
stronger since I met you. I’m not arrogant enough to believe that has anything to do with
me, but I think this experience has changed you. I know it’s changed me. From the very
beginning you had your own brand of fearlessness, and that has been polished into
something strong. Where I used to imagine you as a girl with a bag full of stones, ready to
throw them at any foe who crossed her path, you have become the stone itself. You are
steady and able. And I bet your family sees that in you. I should have told you that. I hope
you come home soon so I can.
    Maxon

December 26, 7:40 p.m.
Dear America,
    I’ve been thinking of our first kiss. I suppose I should say first kisses, but what I mean is
the second, the one I was actually invited to give you. Did I ever tell you how I felt that
night? It wasn’t just getting my first kiss ever; it was getting to have that first kiss with you.
I’ve seen so much, America, had access to the corners of our planet. But never have I come
across anything so painfully beautiful as that kiss. I wish it was something I could catch
with a net or place in a book. I wish it was something I could save and share with the world
so I could tell the universe: this is what it’s like; this is how it feels when you fall.
   These letters are so embarrassing. I’ll have to burn them before you get home.
   Maxon

December 27, noon
America,
    I might as well tell you this since your maid will tell you anyway. I’ve been thinking of
the little things you do. Sometimes you hum or sing when you walk around the palace.
Sometimes when I come up to your room, I hear the melodies you’ve saved up in your heart
spilling out the doorway. The palace seems empty without them.
    I also miss your smell. I miss your perfume drifting off your hair when you turn to laugh
at me or your scent radiating on your skin when we walk through the garden. It’s
intoxicating.
    So I went to your room to spray your perfume on my handkerchief, another silly trick to
make me feel like you were here. And as I was leaving your room, Mary caught me. I’m not
sure what she was looking after since you’re not here; but she saw me, shrieked, and a guard
came running in to see what was wrong. He had his staff gripped, and his eyes flashed
threateningly. I was nearly attacked. All because I missed your smell.

December 27, 11:00 p.m.
My Dear America,
    I’ve never written a love letter, so forgive me if I fail now. . . .
    The simple thing would be to say that I love you. But, in truth, it’s so much more than
that. I want you, America. I need you.
    I’ve held back so much from you out of fear. I’m afraid that if I show you everything at
once, it will overwhelm you, and you’ll run away. I’m afraid that somewhere in the back of
your heart is a love for someone else that will never die. I’m afraid that I will make a
mistake again, something so huge that you retreat into that silent world of yours. No
scolding from a tutor, no lashing from my father, no isolation in my youth has ever hurt me
so much as you separating yourself from me.
    I keep thinking that it’s there, waiting to come back and strike me. So I’ve held on to all
my options, fearing that the moment I wipe them away, you will be standing there with your
arms closed, happy to be my friend but unable to be my equal, my queen, my wife.
    And for you to be my wife is all I want in the world. I love you. I was afraid to admit it
for a long time, but I know it now.
    I would never rejoice in the loss of your father, the sadness you’ve felt since he passed, or
the emptiness I’ve experienced since you left. But I’m so grateful that you had to go. I’m not
sure how long it would have taken for me to figure this out if I hadn’t had to start trying to
imagine a life without you. I know now, with absolute certainty, that is nothing I want.
    I wish I was as true an artist as you so that I could find a way to tell you what you’ve
become to me. America, my love, you are sunlight falling through trees. You are laughter
that breaks through sadness. You are the breeze on a too-warm day. You are clarity in the
midst of confusion.
    You are not the world, but you are everything that makes the world good. Without you,
my life would still exist, but that’s all it would manage to do.
   You said that to get things right one of us would have to take a leap of faith. I think I’ve
discovered the canyon that must be leaped, and I hope to find you waiting for me on the
other side.
   I love you, America.
   Yours forever,
   Maxon
CHAPTER 30

THE GREAT ROOM WAS PACKED. For once, instead of the king and queen being the focal point of
the room, it was Maxon. On a slightly raised platform, Maxon, Kriss, and I sat at an ornate
table. I felt as if our positioning was deceitful. I was on Maxon’s right. I always thought being
on someone’s right was a good thing, an honored position. But so far he’d spent the entire
time speaking to Kriss. As if I didn’t already know what was coming.
    I tried to seem happy as I looked around the room. It was packed. Gavril, of course, was in
a corner, speaking into a camera, narrating the events as they happened.
    Ashley smiled and waved, and beside her Anna winked at me. I gave them a nod, still too
nervous to speak. Toward the back of the room, in deceptively clean clothes, August, Georgia,
and some of the other Northern rebels sat at a table by themselves. Of course Maxon would
want them here to meet his new wife. Little did he know she was one of their own.
    They surveyed the room tensely, as if they feared any second a guard would recognize
them and attack. The guards didn’t seem to be paying attention though. In fact, this was the
first time I’d ever seen them look so poorly focused, eyes meandering around the room,
several of them on edge. I’d even noticed that one or two hadn’t shaved and looked a little
rough. It was a big event though. Maybe they were just rushed.
    My eyes flitted over to Queen Amberly, speaking with her sister Adele and her gaggle of
children. She looked radiant. She’d been waiting for this day for so long. She would love Kriss
like her own. For a moment, I was so jealous of that fact.
    I turned and scanned the faces of the Selected again, and this time my eyes landed on
Celeste. I could see the clear question in her eyes: What are you so worried about? I gave her
a minuscule shake of my head, letting her know that I’d lost. She sent me a thin smile and
mouthed the words It’ll be okay. I nodded, and I tried to believe her. She turned away,
laughing at something someone said; and I finally looked to my right, taking in the face of the
guard stationed closest to our table.
    Aspen was distracted though. He was looking around the room like so many of the other
men in uniform, but he seemed to be trying to think of something. It was as if he was doing a
puzzle in his head. I wished he would look my way, maybe try to explain wordlessly what he
was worried about, but he didn’t.
    “Trying to arrange a time to meet later?” Maxon asked, and I whipped my head back.
    “No, of course not.”
    “It’s not like it matters. Kriss’s family will be here this afternoon for a small celebration,
and yours will be here to take you home. They don’t like for the last loser to be alone. She
tends to get dramatic.”
    He was so cold, so distant. It was as if it wasn’t even Maxon at all.
    “You can keep that house if you want. It’s been paid for. I’d like my letters back though.”
    “I read them,” I whispered. “I loved them.”
    He huffed as if it was a joke. “Don’t know what I was thinking.”
    “Please don’t do this. Please. I love you.” My face was crumpling.
    “Don’t. You. Dare,” Maxon ordered through gritted teeth. “You put on a smile, and you
wear it to the last second.”
    I blinked away the tears and gave a weak smile.
    “That’ll do. Don’t let that slip until you leave the room, do you understand?” I nodded. He
looked into my eyes. “I’ll be glad when you’re gone.”
    After he spat out those last words, his smile returned and he faced Kriss again. I stared
into my lap a minute, slowing my breathing and putting on a brave face.
    When I brought my eyes up again, I didn’t dare to look directly at anyone. I didn’t think I
could honor Maxon’s last wish if I did. Instead, I focused on the walls of the room. It was
because of that I noticed when most of the guards stepped away from them at some signal I
didn’t see. Pieces of red fabric were pulled out of their pockets and tied across their
foreheads.
    I watched in confusion as a red-marked guard walked up behind Celeste and put a bullet
squarely through the back of her head.
    The screaming and gunfire exploded at once. Guttural shouts of pain filled the room,
adding to the cacophony of chairs screeching, bodies hitting walls, and the stampede of
people trying to escape as fast as they could in their heels and suits. The men shouted as they
fired, making the whole thing far more terrifying. I watched, stunned, seeing death more
times in a handful of seconds than ought to be possible. I looked for the king and queen, but
they were gone. I was gripped with fear, unsure if they’d escaped or been captured. I looked
for Adele, for her children. I couldn’t see them anywhere, and that was even worse than
losing sight of the king and queen.
    Beside me, Maxon was trying to calm Kriss. “Get on the floor,” he told her. “We’re going to
be fine.”
    I looked to my right for Aspen and was in awe for a moment. He was on one knee, taking
aim, firing deliberately into the crowd. He must have been very sure of his target to do that.
    Out of the corner of my eye, I saw a flicker of red. Suddenly a rebel guard was standing in
front of us. As I thought the words rebel guard, it all clicked into place. Anne had told me this
had happened once before, when the rebels had gotten the guards’ uniforms and had sneaked
into the palace. But how?
    As Kriss let out another cry, I realized that the guards who were sent to our houses hadn’t
abandoned their posts at all. They were dead and buried, their clothes stolen and standing in
front of us.
    Not that this information did me any good now.
    I knew that I should run, that Maxon and Kriss should run if they were going to make it.
But I was frozen as the menacing figure raised his gun and directed it at Maxon. I looked up
at Maxon, and he looked to me. I wished I had time to speak. I turned away, back to the man.
    A look of amusement crossed his face. As if he suspected this would be much more
entertaining for himself and much more painful for Maxon, he slid his gun ever so slightly to
his left and aimed it at me.
    I didn’t even think to scream. I couldn’t move at all, but I saw the blur of Maxon’s suit
coat as he leaped toward me.
    I fell to the ground, but not in the direction I thought I would. Maxon missed me, flying
across in front of me. When I hit the floor, I looked up to see Aspen. He’d sprinted to the
table and pushed over my chair, crashing on top of me.
    “I got him!” someone shouted. “Find the king!”
    I heard several shouts of delight, pleased with the declaration. And screaming. So much
screaming. As I came out of my stupor, the sounds crashed into my ears again. Other chairs
and bodies clamored to the floor. Guards yelled out orders. Shots were fired, and the
sickening pops pierced my ears. It was pure pandemonium.
    “Are you hurt?” Aspen demanded over the commotion.
    I think I shook my head.
    “Don’t move.”
    I watched as he stood, widened his stance, and aimed. He fired several times, eyes focused
and body at ease. By the angle of his shots, it looked like more rebels were trying to get close
to us. Thanks to Aspen, they failed.
    After a quick survey, he popped down again. “I’m going to get her out of here before she
really loses it.”
    He crawled over me and grabbed Kriss, who was covering her ears and crying in earnest.
Aspen pulled her face up and slapped her. She was stunned into silence long enough to listen
to his orders and follow him from the room, shielding her head as she went.
    It was getting quieter. People must be leaving now. Or dying.
    And then I noticed a very still leg hanging out from under the tablecloth. Oh, God! Maxon!
    I scurried under the table to find Maxon breathing with great labor, a large red stain
growing across his shirt. There was a wound below his left shoulder, and it looked very
serious.
    “Oh, Maxon,” I cried. Unsure of what else to do, I balled up the hem of my dress in my
hands and pressed it to the bullet wound. He winced a bit. “I’m so sorry.”
    He reached up his hand and covered mine. “No, I’m sorry,” he said. “I was about to ruin
both our lives.”
    “Don’t talk right now. Just focus, okay?”
    “Look at me, America.”
    I blinked a few times and pulled my gaze up to his eyes. Through the pain, he smiled at
me.
    “Break my heart. Break it a thousand times if you like. It was only ever yours to break
anyway.”
    “Shhh,” I urged.
    “I’ll love you until my very last breath. Every beat of my heart is yours. I don’t want to die
without you knowing that.”
    “Please don’t,” I choked.
    He took his hand off mine and laced it through my hair. The pressure was light, but it was
enough for me to know what he wanted. I bent to kiss him. It was every kiss we’d ever had,
all the uncertainty, all the hope.
    “Don’t give up, Maxon. I love you; please don’t give up.”
    He took an unsteady breath.
    Aspen ducked under the table then, and I squealed in fear before I realized who it was.
    “Kriss is in a safe room, Your Majesty,” Aspen said, all business. “Your turn. Can you
stand?”
    He shook his head. “A waste of time. Take her.”
    “But, Your Majesty—”
    “That’s an order,” he said as forcefully as he could manage.
    Maxon and Aspen stared at each other for a long second.
    “Yes, sir.”
    “No! I won’t go!” I insisted.
    “You’ll go,” Maxon said, sounding tired.
    “Come on, Mer. We’ll have to hurry.”
    “I’m not leaving!”
    Quickly, as if he might suddenly be fine, Maxon reached up to Aspen’s uniform and
clutched it in his hands. “She lives. Do you understand me? Whatever it takes, she lives.”
    Aspen nodded and grabbed my arm harder than I thought possible.
    “No!” I cried. “Maxon, please!”
    “Be happy,” he breathed, squeezing my hand one last time as Aspen dragged me away,
screaming.
    As we got to the door, Aspen pushed me up against the wall. “Shut up! They’ll hear you.
The sooner I get you to a safe room, the sooner I can come back for him. You have to do
whatever I say, got it?”
    I nodded.
    “Okay, stay low and quiet,” he said, pulling out his gun again and dragging me into the
hall.
    We looked up and down, and saw someone running away from us at the far end of the
corridor. Once he was gone we moved. Around the corner we stumbled upon a guard on the
ground. Aspen checked his pulse and shook his head. He reached over and grabbed the
guard’s gun, and handed it to me.
    “What am I supposed to do with this?” I whispered, terrified.
    “Fire it. But make sure you know if it’s a friend or a foe before you do. This is mayhem.”
    It was a tense few minutes of ducking into corners and checking safe rooms that were
already taken and locked. It seemed that most of the action had moved upstairs or outside,
because the pops of gunshots and faceless screams were muffled by walls. Still, each time we
heard a whisper of a sound, we paused before moving.
    Aspen peeked around a corner. “This is a dead end, so keep a lookout.”
    I nodded. We moved quickly to the end of the short hallway, and the first thing I noticed
was the bright sun coming in through the window. Didn’t the sky know the world was falling
apart? How could the sun shine today?
    “Please, please, please,” Aspen whispered, reaching for the lock. Mercifully, it opened.
“Yes!” He sighed, pulling back the door, blocking half the hall from view.
    “Aspen, I don’t want to do this.”
    “You have to. You have to be safe, for so many people. And . . . I need you to do something
for me.”
    “What?”
    He fidgeted. “If something happens to me . . . I need you to tell—”
    Over his shoulder, a hint of red came from behind the corner at the end of the hall. I
jerked the gun up and pointed it past Aspen, firing at the figure. Not a second later, Aspen
pushed me into the safe room and slammed the door, leaving me alone in the dark.
CHAPTER 31

I DON’T KNOW HOW LONG I sat there. I kept listening for something outside the door, even
though I knew it was useless. When Maxon and I had been locked in a safe room a few weeks
ago, we couldn’t hear a single sound from the outside world. And there had been so much
destruction then.
    Still, I hoped. Maybe Aspen was okay and would open the door at any second. He couldn’t
be dead. No. Aspen was a fighter; he’d always been a fighter. When hunger and poverty
threatened him, he pushed back. When the world took away his dad, he made sure his family
survived. When the Selection took me, when the draft took him, he didn’t let it stop him from
hoping. Compared to all that, a bullet was tiny, insignificant. No bullet was taking down
Aspen Leger.
    I pressed my ear up to the door, praying for a word, a breath, anything. I focused, listening
for something that sounded like Maxon’s labored breathing as he lay dying underneath the
table.
    I pinched my eyes together, begging God to keep him alive. Certainly, everyone in the
palace would be looking for Maxon and his parents. They would be the first ones helped. They
wouldn’t let him die; they couldn’t.
    But was it past hope?
    He’d looked so pale. Even the last squeeze of my hand was weak.
    Be happy.
    He loved me. He really loved me. And I loved him. In spite of everything that should have
kept us apart—our castes, our mistakes, the world around us—we were supposed to be
together.
    I should be with him. Especially now, while he lay dying. I shouldn’t be hiding.
    I stood up and started feeling around the walls for the light switch. I slapped the steel
until I found it. I surveyed the space. It was smaller than the other room I’d been in. It had a
sink but no toilet, just a bucket in one corner. A bench was pressed up against the wall by the
door, and a shelf with some packets of food and blankets lined the back. And then finally, on
the floor, the gun sat cold and waiting.
    I didn’t even know if this would work, but I had to try. I pulled the bench over to the
middle of the room and tipped it on its side with the wide seat propped up toward the door. I
crouched below it, checking the height, and realized that wasn’t going to be much cover. It
would have to do though.
    As I stood, I tripped over my stupid dress. Huffing, I hunted on the shelves. The thin knife
was probably for opening and dividing food, but it worked on the material just fine. Once my
dress was cut into an uneven hem around my knees, I took some of the fabric and made a
makeshift belt and tucked the knife in it for good measure.
    I pulled the blankets over myself, expecting there to be some sort of shrapnel. Looking
one more time around the room, I tried to see if there was anything I should take with me,
something I could repurpose. No. This was it.
    Ducking behind the bench, I aimed the gun at the lock, took a steadying breath, and fired.
    The sound echoed in the tiny space, scaring me even though I’d been expecting it. Once I
was sure that the bullet wasn’t ricocheting around the room, I went up to check the door.
Above the lock, a small crater sat, exposing rough layers of metal. I was upset that I’d missed,
but at least I knew this might work. If I hit the lock enough times, maybe I could get out of
here.
   I hid behind the bench and tried again. Shot after shot hit the door, but never in the same
place. After a while, I got frustrated and stood up straight, hoping it would help. All I
managed to do was get my arms cut by pieces of the door flying back at me.
   It wasn’t until I heard the hollow click that I realized I’d used all the bullets and was
stuck. I threw down the gun and ran over to the door. I hit it with all the force of my body.
   “Move!” I rammed into it again. “MOVE!”
   I hit the door with my fists, accomplishing nothing. “No! No, no, no! I have to get out!”
   The door stood there, silent and severe, mocking my heartbreak with its stillness.
   I slid down to the floor, crying now that I knew there was nothing I could do. Aspen might
be a lifeless body only feet away from me, and Maxon . . . surely by now he was gone.
   I curled my legs to my chest and rested my head against the door.
   “If you live,” I whispered, “I’ll let you call me your dear. I won’t complain, I promise.”
   And then I was left to wait.

Every so often I’d try to guess at the time, though I had no way of knowing if I was right.
Each sluggish minute was maddening. I’d never felt so powerless, and the worry was killing
me.
    After an eternity, I heard the click of the lock. Someone was coming for me. I didn’t know
if it was a friend or not, so I pointed the empty gun at the door. It would at least look
intimidating. The door creaked open, and the light from the window glared in. Did that mean
it was still the same day? Or was it the next? I held my aim though I had to squint to do so.
    “Don’t shoot, Lady America!” a guard pleaded. “You’re safe!”
    “How do I know that? How do I know you’re not one of them?”
    The guard looked down the hall, acknowledging an approaching figure. August stepped
into the light, followed closely by Gavril. Though his suit was practically destroyed, his pin—
which I now realized looked an awful lot like a North Star—still hung proudly on his bloody
lapel.
    No wonder the Northern rebels knew so much.
    “It’s over, America. We got them,” August confirmed.
    I sighed, overwhelmed with relief, and dropped the gun.
    “Where’s Maxon? Is he alive? Did Kriss make it?” I asked Gavril before focusing again on
August. “There was an officer; he brought me here. His name is Officer Leger; have you seen
him?” The words tumbled out almost too quickly to be understood.
    I was feeling funny, light-headed.
    “I think she’s in shock. Take her to the hospital wing, quickly,” Gavril ordered, and the
guard scooped me up easily.
    “Maxon?” I asked. No one answered. Or maybe I was gone by then. I couldn’t remember.

When I woke up, I was on a cot. I could feel the stings of my many cuts now, but as I picked
up my arm to inspect it, the cuts were all clean, and the larger ones were bandaged. I was
safe.
     I sat up and looked around, and realized I was in a tiny office. I inspected the desk and the
diplomas on the wall and discovered it was Dr. Ashlar’s. I couldn’t stay here. I needed
answers.
     When I opened the door, I discovered why I’d been tucked away. The hospital wing was
packed. Some of the less injured were placed two to a bed, and others were on the floor
between them. It was easy to tell that the worst were in beds toward the back of the room.
Despite the number of people, the space was remarkably quiet.
     I scanned the area, looking for familiar faces. Was it good not to find them here? What did
that mean?
     Tuesday was in a bed, holding on to Emmica as they cried quietly. I recognized a few of
the maids, but only vaguely. They nodded their heads at me as I passed, as if I somehow
deserved it.
     I started losing hope as the crowd started to thin. Maxon wasn’t here. If he was, he’d have
a swarm of people around him, jumping to meet his every need. But I’d been placed in a side
room. Maybe he had, too?
     I saw a guard, and his face was scarred from what I couldn’t guess. “Is the prince down
here somewhere?” I asked quietly.
     Solemnly, he shook his head.
     “Oh.”
     A bullet wound and a broken heart would seem like two different injuries. But I could feel
myself bleeding out just as surely as Maxon had. No amount of pressure or stitching would
ever fix this; nothing would ever stop the ache.
     I didn’t break into a scream, though it felt as if something similar was happening inside. I
just let the tears fall. They didn’t wash anything away, but they felt like a promise.
     Nothing will ever replace you, Maxon. And I sealed our love away.
     “Mer?”
     I turned and saw a bandaged figure in one of the last beds in the wing. Aspen.
     My breathing hitched as I took unsteady steps toward him. His head was bandaged, and
there was blood staining its way through. His chest was bare and bruised in several places,
but the worst part was his leg. A thick cast was wrapped around the bottom, and several
bandages were sloppily placed over gashes on his thigh. Wearing nothing but some shorts
and a bit of a sheet over his other leg, it was easy to see how badly he’d been wounded.
     “What happened?” I whispered.
     “I’d rather not relive the details. I made it for a long time, and I took out maybe six or
seven of them before one got my leg. The doctor says I’ll probably be able to walk on it, but
I’ll need a cane. At least I’m alive.”
     A tear continued silently down my cheek. I was so grateful and scared and hopeless, I
couldn’t help it.
     “You saved my life, Mer.”
     My eyes flew from his leg to his face.
     “The shot you took spooked that rebel and gave me just enough time to fire. If you hadn’t
done it, he would have shot me in the back, and that would have been it. Thank you.”
     I wiped my eyes. “It was you who saved my life. You always have. It’s about time I started
paying you back.”
     He smiled. “I do have a tendency for heroics, don’t I?”
    “You always wanted to be someone’s knight in shining armor.” I shook my head, thinking
over everything he’d ever done for anyone he loved.
    “Mer, listen to me. When I said that I’d always love you, I meant it. And I think if we had
stayed in Carolina, we would have gotten married, and we would have been happy. Poor, but
happy.” He smiled sadly. “But we didn’t stay in Carolina. And you’ve changed. I have, too. You
were right when you said that I’d never given anyone else a chance, and why would I have
ever bothered except for all this happening?
    “It’s my instinct to fight for you, Mer. It took me a long time to see that you didn’t want
me to do that anymore. But once I did, I realized I didn’t want to fight for you either.”
    I stared at him, stunned.
    “You’ll always have a piece of my heart, Mer, but I’m not in love with you anymore. I
think sometimes that you still need me or want me, but I don’t know if that’s right. You
deserve better than me being with you because I feel obligated.”
    I sighed. “And you deserve better than being someone I settle for.”
    He held out his hand to me and I took it. “I don’t want you to be mad at me.”
    “I’m not. It’s good to know you’re not mad at me. Even if he is dead, I still love him.”
    Aspen’s forehead creased. “Who’s dead?”
    “Maxon,” I breathed, ready to cry again.
    There was a pause. “Maxon’s not dead.”
    “What! But that guard said he wasn’t here and—”
    “Of course he’s not here. He’s the king. He’s recovering in his room.”
    I lunged to hug him, and he grunted at the impact of my embrace; but I was too happy to
be cautious. Then the happy and sad news mixed together.
    I stepped back slowly. “The king died?”
    Aspen nodded. “The queen, too.”
    “No!” I shuddered, blinking again. She said I could call her Mom. What was Maxon going
to do without her?
    “Actually, if it hadn’t been for the Northern rebels, Maxon might not have made it either.
They were really the tipping point.”
    “They were?”
    I could see the wonder and appreciation in his eyes. “We should have had rebels training
us. They fight differently. They knew what to do. I recognized August and Georgia in the
Great Room. They had backup outside the palace walls. Once they realized something was
wrong, well, they already have a talent for getting into the palace quickly. I don’t know where
they got the artillery from, but we’d all be gone without them.”
    I could hardly take in all this. I was still putting the pieces together when the opening
door disturbed the quiet murmurs in the wing. A worried face surveyed the room, and though
her dress was torn and her hair was tumbling down around her face, I recognized her
immediately.
    Before I could call out to her, Aspen did. “Lucy!” he cried, sitting up. I knew the motion
had to hurt him, but there was no sign of pain in his face.
    “Aspen!” She gasped and ran across the wing, hopping over people as necessary. She fell
into his arms, kissing his face over and over. While he’d grunted in pain when I’d hugged
him, it was clear that in this moment, Aspen wasn’t feeling anything but pure happiness.
    “Where were you?” he demanded.
    “Fourth floor. They’re only now reaching the rooms up there. I came as fast as I could.
What happened?” Though she was usually so panicked after rebel attacks, Lucy seemed
focused now, seeing only Aspen.
    “I’m fine. What about you? Do you need to see the doctor?” Aspen looked around, trying
to find someone to help.
    “No, I don’t even have a scratch,” she promised. “I was just worried about you.”
    Aspen stared into Lucy’s eyes with absolute devotion. “Now that you’re here, everything’s
right.”
    She stroked his face, careful not to disturb his bandages. He put a hand behind her neck
and gently pulled her to him, kissing her deeply.
    No one needed a knight more than Lucy, and no one could protect her better than Aspen.
    They were so lost in each other; they didn’t notice me walk away, heading off to find the
one person I really wanted to see.
CHAPTER 32

LEAVING THE HOSPITAL WING , I got my first look at the palace. It was hard to process the
destruction. So much broken glass strewn across the floor, glittering hopefully in the
sunlight. Ruined paintings, parts of the wall blown out, and menacing red stains on the
carpets reminded me of how close we’d all been to death.
    I started up the stairs, trying to avoid eye contact with anyone. As I passed from the
second floor to the third, I noticed an earring on the floor. I couldn’t help but wonder if its
owner was still alive.
    I made my way to the landing and saw a number of guards as I walked toward Maxon’s
room. I supposed it was unavoidable. If I had to, maybe I’d call out to him. Maybe he’d tell
them to let me pass . . . just like the night we met.
    The door to Maxon’s room was open, and people buzzed in and out, bringing in papers or
taking away platters. Six guards lined the wall leading up to the door, and I braced myself for
the brush-off. But as I got closer, one of the guards noticed me. He squinted, as if double-
checking that I was who he thought I was. Beside him, another guard recognized me, and one
by one they bowed, deeply and reverently.
    One of the guards by the door extended an arm. “He’s been waiting for you, my lady.”
    I tried to be someone deserving of the honor they were giving me. I stood taller as I
walked, though my scratched arms and cut-off dress did nothing to help. “Thank you,” I said
with a gentle nod.
    A maid rushed past as I went in. Maxon was on his bed, the left side of his chest padded
with gauze under his plain cotton shirt. His left arm was in a sling, and he used his right to
hold up the paper some adviser was explaining to him.
    He looked so normal there, dressed down, hair a mess. But at the same time, he looked
like so much more than he had been before. Was he sitting a little taller? Had his face
somehow become more serious?
    He was so clearly the king.
    “Your Majesty,” I breathed, falling into a low curtsy. Standing, I saw the quiet smile in his
eyes.
    “Set the papers here, Stavros. Would everyone please leave the room? I need to speak with
the lady.”
    Everyone circling around him bowed and headed toward the hall. Stavros quietly placed
the papers on Maxon’s bedside table, and as he passed, he winked at me. I waited until the
door closed before I moved.
    I wanted to run to him, to fall into his embrace and stay there forever. But I moved slowly,
worried that maybe he regretted his last words to me.
    “I’m so sorry about your parents.”
    “It doesn’t seem real yet,” he said, motioning that I should sit on the bed. “I keep thinking
that Father is in his study, and Mom’s downstairs, and any minute one of them will come in
here with something for me to do.”
    “I know exactly what you mean.”
    He gave me a sympathetic smile. “I know you do.” He reached out and put his hand on
mine. I took that as a good sign and held his hand back. “She tried to save him. A guard told
me a rebel had my father in his sights, but she ran behind him. She went down first, but they
got Father immediately after.”
    He shook his head. “She was always selfless. To her very last breath.”
    “You shouldn’t be so surprised. You’re a lot like her.”
    He made a face. “I’ll never be quite as good as her. I’m going to miss her so much.”
    I rubbed his hand. She wasn’t my mother, but I would miss her as well.
    “At least you’re safe,” he said, not looking into my eyes. “At least there’s that.”
    There was a long stretch of silence, and I didn’t know what to say. Should I bring up what
he said? Should I ask about Kriss? Would he even want to think about any of this now?
    “There’s something I want to show you,” he suddenly announced. “Mind you, it’s a bit
rough, but I think you’ll still like it. Open the drawer here,” he instructed. “It should be on the
top.”
    I pulled out the drawer in his bedside table, noticing a pile of typed papers right away. I
gave Maxon a questioning look, but he just nodded toward the writing.
    I started reading the document, trying to process what it said. I got to the end of the first
paragraph and then reread it, sure I was mistaken.
    “Are you . . . you’re going to dissolve the castes?” I asked, looking up to Maxon.
    “That’s the plan,” he answered, smiling. “I don’t want you to get too excited. This will take
a long time to do, but I think it will work. You see,” he said, turning the pages of the vast file
and pointing to a paragraph. “I want to start from the bottom. I’m planning on eliminating
the Eight label first. There’s a lot of construction we need to do; and I feel like, with a little bit
of work, the Eights could be absorbed into the Sevens. After that, it gets tricky. There’s got to
be a way to get rid of the stigmas that come along with the numbers, but that’s my goal.”
    I was awestruck. I’d only ever known a world in which I wore my caste like a piece of
clothing. And here I was, holding something saying that those invisible lines we’d drawn
between people could finally be erased.
    Maxon’s hand touched mine. “I want you to know that this is all your doing. Since the day
you called me into the hallway and told me about being hungry, I’ve been working on this. It
was one of the reasons I got so upset after you did your presentation; I had a quieter way of
reaching the exact same goal. But of all the things I wanted to do for my country, this would
have never crossed my mind if I hadn’t known you.”
    I took in a breath and gazed at the pages again. I thought over the years of my life, so
short and fast. I’d never expected to do more than sing in the background of people’s house
parties and maybe get married one day. I thought about what this would mean for the people
of Illéa, and I was beside myself. I felt both humbled and proud.
    “There’s something else,” Maxon said hesitantly as I continued to take in the words in
front of me. Then suddenly, on top of the papers, Maxon slid over an open box with a ring
resting in it, shining in the light cascading through his windows.
    “I’ve been sleeping with that darn thing under my pillow,” he said, sounding playfully
irritated. I looked up to him, not saying anything, as I was still too stunned to speak. I was
sure he could read the questions in my eyes, but he had his own to address. “Do you like it?”
    A web of thin gold vines crawled up, forming the circle of the ring, holding at the top two
gems—one green, one purple—that kissed at the crown of it. I knew the purple one was my
birthstone, so the green one must be his. There we were, two little spots of light growing
together, inseparable.
    I meant to speak and opened my mouth several times to try. All I could manage to do was
smile, blink back my tears, and nod.
    Maxon cleared his throat. “Twice now I’ve tried to do this on a grand scale and failed
spectacularly. As it is, I can’t even get on one knee. I hope you won’t mind if I just speak to
you plainly.”
    I nodded. I still couldn’t find a word in my entire body.
    He swallowed and shrugged his uninjured shoulder. “I love you,” he said simply. “I should
have told you a long time ago. Maybe we could have avoided so many stupid mistakes if I had.
Then again,” he added, beginning to smile, “sometimes I think it was all those obstacles that
made me love you so deeply.”
    Tears pooled in the corners of my eyes, balancing on my lashes.
    “What I said was true. My heart is yours to break. As you already know, I’d rather die than
see you in pain. In the moment I was hit, when I fell to the floor sure my life was ending, all I
could think about was you.”
    Maxon had to stop. He swallowed, and I could see he was as close to tears as I was. After a
moment, he continued.
    “In those seconds, I was mourning everything I’d lost. How I’d never get to see you walk
down an aisle toward me, how I’d never get to see your face in our children, how I’d never get
to see streaks of silver in your hair. But, at the same time, I couldn’t be bothered. If me dying
meant you living”—he did his one-shoulder shrug again—“how could that be anything but
good?”
    At that, I lost my control, and the tears came in earnest. How had I ever thought that I
knew what it meant to be loved before this very second? Nothing had come close to this
feeling radiating in my heart, filling every inch of me with absolute warmth.
    “America,” Maxon said sweetly, forcing me to wipe my eyes and face him. “I know you see
a king here, but let me be clear; this isn’t a command. This is a request, a plea. I beg you;
make me the happiest man alive. Please do me the honor of becoming my wife.”
    I couldn’t get out how much I wanted this. But where my voice failed, my body succeeded.
I crawled into Maxon’s arms, holding on to him tightly, certain that nothing could ever pull
us apart. When he kissed me, I felt my life settle into place. I had found everything I’d ever
wanted—things I didn’t even know I was looking for—here in Maxon’s arms. And if I had him
to guide me, to hold me, then I could take on the world.
    It seemed too soon our kiss slowed, and Maxon pulled back to look into my eyes. I saw it
in his face. I was home. And I finally found my voice.
    “Yes.”
EPILOGUE

I TRY NOT TO SHAKE, but it does no good. Any girl would do the same. The day is big, the dress is
heavy, and the eyes watching are uncountable. Brave as I ought to be, I tremble.
    I know that once the doors open, I will see Maxon waiting for me, so while all the last-
second details are settled around me, I hold on to that promise and try to relax.
    “Oh! This is our cue,” Mom says, noting the change in the music. Silvia waves my family
over. James and Kenna are ready to go. Gerad is running around, already wrinkling his suit,
and May keeps trying desperately to get him to stand in one place for two seconds back-to-
back. Even if he is a bit rumpled, they all look surprisingly regal today.
    As happy as I am that everyone who loves me is with me, I can’t help but feel an ache that
Dad isn’t here. I feel him, though, whispering how much he loves me, how proud he is, how
lovely I look. I knew him so well that I feel like I can pick out the exact words he would say to
me today; and I hope it stays like that always, that he’ll never really be gone.
    I’m so lost in my daydreams that May sneaks up on me. “You look beautiful, Ames,” she
says, reaching up to touch the intricate high collar of my dress.
    “Mary outdid herself, didn’t she?” I answer, touching parts of the dress myself. Mary is
the only one of my original maids still with me. When the dust settled, we found out so many
more lives were lost than we’d guessed at first. While Lucy made it through the attack and
chose to retire, Anne was simply gone.
    Another empty place today that ought to be filled.
    “My gosh, Ames, you’re shaking.” May grabs my hands and tries to still them, laughing at
my nerves.
    “I know. I can’t help it.”
    “Marlee,” May calls. “Come help me calm America down.”
    My one and only bridesmaid walks over, her eyes as bright as ever; and with the two of
them surrounding me, I do start to feel less tense.
    “Don’t worry, America; I’m sure he’ll show up,” she teases. May laughs, and I swat at
them both.
    “I’m not worried he’ll change his mind! I’m afraid I’ll trip or mispronounce his name or
something. I have a talent for messing things up,” I lament.
    Marlee puts her forehead on mine. “Nothing could mess up today.”
    “May!” Mom hisses.
    “Okay, Mom’s losing it. See you up there.” She gives me a ghost kiss on my cheek, making
sure not to leave a lipstick smudge, and goes on her way. The music plays, and they walk
together around the corner and down the aisle that’s waiting for me.
    Marlee steps back. “Am I next?”
    “Yes. I love this color on you, by the way.”
    She juts out her hip, posing in the gown. “You have great taste, Your Majesty.”
    I suck in a breath. “No one’s called me that yet. Oh, goodness, that’s going to be my name
to pretty much everyone.” I try to adjust to the words quickly. The coronation is part of the
wedding. First the vows to Maxon, then the ones to Illéa. Rings, then crowns.
    “Don’t start getting nervous again!” she insists.
     “I’m trying! I mean, I knew it was coming; it’s just a lot for one day.”
     “Ha!” she exclaims as the music shifts. “Wait until tonight.”
     “Marlee!”
     Before I can scold her, she scampers away, winking as she goes, and I’m forced to giggle.
I’m so glad to have her back in my life. I officially made her one of my attendants, and Maxon
did the same for Carter. It was a clear sign to the public of what was coming with Maxon’s
reign, and I was happy to see how many people welcomed the change.
     I listen, waiting. I know the notes are coming soon, so I take one last chance to straighten
my dress.
     It’s truly magnificent. The white gown is fitted through my hips, flitting out in waves to
the floor. The lace sleeves are short and lead to a high collar that genuinely makes me look
like a princess. Over the dress, a sleeveless capelike coat flows out behind me, making a train.
I’ll take it off for the reception, where I intend to dance with my husband until I can’t stand
anymore.
     “Ready, Mer?”
     I turn to Aspen. “Yes. I’m ready.”
     He holds an arm out for me, and I put mine through his. “You look incredible.”
     “You clean up pretty nice yourself,” I comment. And though I smile, I know he sees my
nervousness.
     “There’s nothing to worry about,” he assures me, that confident smile making me believe
that whatever he says is true, same as always.
     I take in a deep breath and nod. “Right. Just don’t let me fall, okay?”
     “Don’t worry. If you look unsteady, I’ll hand you this.” He holds up the deep-blue cane,
specially made to match his dress uniform, and the idea makes me laugh.
     “There we go,” he says, happy to see me genuinely smile.
     “Your Majesty?” Silvia asks. “It’s time.” Her tone is slightly awed.
     I give her a nod, and Aspen and I make our way to the doors.
     “Knock ’em dead,” he says just before the music rises and we’re revealed to the guests.
     All the fear rushes back. Though we tried to keep the guest list small, hundreds of people
line the aisle that will take me to Maxon. And as they all rise to greet me, I can’t see him.
     I just need to see his face. If I can find those steady eyes, I’ll know I can do this.
     I smile, trying to stay calm, graciously nodding at our guests, thanking them for their
presence here today. But Aspen knows.
     “It’s okay, Mer.”
     I look to him, and the encouragement in his expression helps.
     I keep moving.
     It’s not the most graceful parade down the aisle. It’s also not the fastest. With Aspen’s leg
so injured, we have to hobble our way slowly to the front. But who else could I have asked?
Who else would I have asked? Aspen had shifted to fill a desperate place in my life. Not my
boyfriend, not my friend, but my family.
     I had expected him to say no, afraid it was somehow an insult. But he’d said he was
honored and embraced me when I’d asked.
     Devoted and true, even to the very end. That’s my Aspen.
     Finally I see a familiar face in the crowd. Lucy is there, sitting with her father. She beams
with pride for me, though really she can hardly tear her eyes off Aspen. He stands a little
taller as we pass her. I know that soon it will be her turn, and I’m looking forward to it. Aspen
couldn’t have made a better choice.
    Beside her, filling up the closest rows, are the other Selected girls. It was brave of them to
come back for me, considering not everyone who should be here is. Still, they smile, even
Kriss, though I can see the sadness in her eyes. I’m shocked by how much I wish Celeste was
here. I can imagine her rolling her eyes and then winking, or something like that. Making
some wisecrack that was almost snotty but not quite. I really, really miss her.
    I miss Queen Amberly, too. I can only imagine how happy she would have been today,
finally getting a daughter. I feel as if marrying Maxon makes it okay for me to love her that
way, like a mother. I’m certain I always will.
    And then there’s my mom and May holding on to each other so tightly they look as if
they’re supporting each other. Around them are so many smiles. It’s almost overwhelming
how loved I feel.
    I’m so distracted by their faces that I forget how close I am to the end of the aisle. As I
turn forward . . . he’s there.
    And then it seems as if no one else is here at all.
    No cameras filming, no bulbs flashing. It’s just us. It’s just Maxon and me.
    He’s wearing his crown, and the suit with the blue sash and the medals. What did I say the
first time he wore it? Something about hanging him up with the chandeliers, I think. I smile,
remembering the long journey that got us here, standing at the altar.
    Aspen’s last few steps are slow but steady. When we reach our destination, I turn to him.
Aspen gives me one last smile, and I reach over to kiss his cheek, saying good-bye to so many
things. We share a look for a moment, and he takes my hand and puts it in Maxon’s, giving
me away.
    They nod to each other, nothing but respect in their faces. I don’t think I could ever
understand all that’s passed between them, but it feels peaceful in that moment. Aspen steps
back, and I step forward, arriving at the one place I never thought I’d be.
    Maxon and I move close to each other as the ceremony starts.
    “Hello, my dear,” he whispers.
    “Don’t start,” I warn in return, and we’re both left smiling.
    He holds my hands as if they’re the only things pinning him to the earth, and I focus on
that as I prepare myself for the words coming, the promises I’ll never break. It’s magical,
really, the power this day has.
    But even now I know this isn’t a fairy tale. I know that we’ll have hard times, confusing
times. I know that things won’t always happen the way we want them to and that we’ll have
to work to remember that we chose this. It won’t be perfect, not all the time.
    This isn’t happily ever after.
    It’s so much more than that.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

CAN Y OU JUST PUT Y OUR hand on the page and pretend I’m giving you a high five? Seriously.
How else do I thank you for reading my books? I hope you’ve had as much fun with
America’s story as I have, and I’ll never be able to express how happy I am that you took the
time to go through it with me. You’re keen. Thank you so much!
    First of all, a huge thank-you to Callaway. It still makes my day when I see your “Husband
of the #1 New York Times bestselling author Kiera Cass” email signature, and I’m so glad
you’re proud of me. Thanks for being my biggest supporter through this whole journey. Love
you!
    Thank you, Guyden and Zuzu, for being such great kids and letting mommy run off to her
office to work. You’re wonderful little people, and I love you bunches.
    To Mimoo, Poopa, and Uncle Jody, thanks for all your encouragement, and the same goes
for Mimi, Papa, and Uncle Chris. Lots of little things couldn’t have happened without your
help, so thank you for being there, not just for me, but for our whole little family.
    To the best agent ever, Elana Roth Parker. I wanted you to want me so bad! Thanks for
your faith and hard work and for just plain old being cool. If I was ever in a street fight, I’d
want you right there beside me. I mean that in the best way possible. *HUGS*
    To Erica Sussman, my fantastic editor. So much of this story worked because of you.
Thank you so much for taking me on. I’m crazy about you and your purple pens and your
smiley faces! I feel bad for any author who has to work with an editor that isn’t you.
Absolutely the best!
    To everyone at HarperTeen, for being so brilliant and for working so hard. You were the
place I longed to call home, and I can’t believe how good you are to me! Thank you so much!
    To Kathleen, who takes care of all the foreign rights. Thanks for getting my books (and
me!) all over the world! It’s still unbelievable.
    To Samantha Clark, for running the Kiera Cass fan page on Facebook without ever being
asked to do it or complaining about any work it brings her way. So, so cool of you! Thank you!
    To everyone who runs a Selection-based Twitter, Tumblr, or Facebook account. Half of the
time I can’t read the language you’re posting in, and that alone is insane to me! Thanks for
being diligent and creative and for talking to me. For realsies, you guys are the best!
    To Georgia Whitaker, for making a really rad video and earning her name a spot in the
book. Thanks for letting me borrow it!
    Who am I forgetting? Like a thousand people, I just know it . . .
    To Northstar church (which I swear I started going to years after The Selection was born),
thanks for being home to the Cass family and for your constant encouragement.
    To FTW . . . I don’t even know what to say. You guys are ridiculous, and I love you.
    To The Fray, One Direction, Jack’s Mannequin, Paramore, Elbow, and a slew of other
musicians, thanks for keeping me inspired over the years. You were fuel for these stories.
    As well as Coke Zero and low-fat Wheat Thins. Sometimes also Milk Duds. Very important
to my survival over the years, so thanks.
    Lastly, and most important, to God. Years ago, writing saved me from a very dark time in
my life. It wasn’t on my radar at all, but it became my lifeline. I believe it was grace that
brought this into my life, and even on the most stressful days, my job makes me happy. I feel
blessed a thousand times over and even though I write for a living, I still can’t find the words
to express my gratitude. Thank you.

                               www.mobilism.org
ABOUT THE AUTHOR




                                    PHOTO BY ROBBIE POFF

KIERA CASS is the #1 New York Times bestselling author of The Selection series, as well as
the self-published fantasy novel The Siren. She is a graduate of Radford University and
currently lives in Blacksburg, Virginia, with her family. Kiera has kissed approximately
fourteen boys in her life. None of them were princes. You can learn more about Kiera’s books,
videos, and love of cake online at www.kieracass.com.

Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your favorite HarperCollins
authors and artists.
BACK ADS
BOOKS BY KIERA CASS

                            The Selection
                              The Elite
           The Selection Stories: The Prince & The Guard
CREDITS

          COVER ART © 2014 BY GUSTAVO MARX/MERGE LEFT REPS, INC.
                    COVER DESIGN BY ERIN FITZSIMMONS
COPYRIGHT

                                   HarperTeen is an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers.

THE ONE. Copyright © 2014 by Kiera Cass. All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions.
By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the nonexclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of
 this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse-engineered, or
stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or
      mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.
                                                     www.epicreads.com


                                    Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Cass, Kiera.
The one / Kiera Cass. — First edition.
pages cm
Summary: “As her Selection approaches its finish, America must decide where her heart truly lies—and Prince Maxon must
pick one winner to wear the crown”— Provided by publisher.
ISBN 978-0-06-205999-4 (hardcover bdg.)
ISBN 978-0-06-232547-1 (int’l ed.)
ISBN 978-0-06-234071-9 (special ed.)
ISBN 978-0-06-233849-5 (special ed.)
ISBN 978-0-06-233850-1 (special ed.)
EPub Edition March 2014 ISBN 9780062060013
[1. Marriage—Fiction. 2. Contests—Fiction. 3. Social classes—Fiction. 4. Princes—Fiction. 5. Love—Fiction. 6. Revolutionaries
—Fiction.]
I. Title.
PZ7 .C2 6 8 5 1 3 3 On e 2 0 1 4                                                                                2 01 3 02 1 3 5 6
[Fic]—dc2 3                                                                                                                  CIP
                                                                                                                             AC



                                         14 15 16 17 18 CG/RRDH 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1


                                                       FIRST EDITION
ABOUT THE PUBLISHER


Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street
Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia
http://www.harpercollins.com.au

Canada
HarperCollins Canada
2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor
Toronto, ON, M4W, 1A8, Canada
http://www.harpercollins.ca

New Zealand
HarperCollins Publishers (New Zealand) Limited
P.O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollins.co.nz

United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.harpercollins.co.uk

United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollins.com
